Every bit of
that ground had to be broken up still more with a spade, and then the
clods which were full of grass-roots had to be taken on a fork and
shaken, till the earth fell out; when the grass was thrown to one side. That would not have had to be done if the land had been ploughed in the
autumn; the grass would have rotted in the ground, and would have made
food for the plants. Now, Margery's father put the fertiliser on the
top, and then raked it into the earth. At last, it was time to make the place for the seeds. Margery and her
mother helped. Father tied one end of a cord to a little stake, and
drove the stake in the ground at one end of the garden. Then he took the
cord to the other end of the garden and pulled it tight, tied it to
another stake, and drove that down. That made a straight line. Then he
hoed a trench, a few inches deep, the whole length of the cord, and
scattered fertiliser in it. Pretty soon the whole garden was lined with
little trenches. "Now for the seed," said father. Margery ran and brought the seed box. "May I help?" she asked. "If you watch me sow one row, I think you can do the next," said her
father. So Margery watched. Her father took a handful of peas, and, stooping,
walked slowly along the line, letting the seed trickle through his
fingers. It was pretty to watch; it made Margery think of a photograph
her teacher had, a photograph of a famous picture called "The Sower." Perhaps you have seen it. Putting in the seed was not so easy to do as to watch; sometimes Margery
dropped in too much, and sometimes not enough; but her father was
patient with her, and soon she did better. They planted peas, beans, spinach, carrots, and parsnips. And Margery's
father made a row of holes, after that, for the tomato plants. He said
those had to be transplanted; they could not be sown from seed. When the seeds were in the trenches they had to be covered up, and
Margery really helped at that. It is fun to do it. You stand beside the
little trench and walk backward, and as you walk you hoe the loose earth
back over the seeds; the same earth that was hoed up you pull back
again. Then you rake very gently over the surface, with the back of a
rake, to even it all off. Margery liked it, because now the garden began
to look _like_ a garden. But best of all was the work next day, when her own little particular
garden was begun. Father Brown loved Margery and Margery's mother so
much that he wanted their garden to be perfect, and that meant a great
deal more work. He knew very well that the old grass would begin to come
through again on such soil, and that it would make terribly hard
weeding. He was not going to have any such thing for his two "little
girls," as he called them. So he gave that little garden particular
attention. This is what he did. After he had thrown out all the turf, he shovelled clean earth on to the
garden,--as much as three solid inches of it; not a bit of grass was in
that. Then it was ready for raking and fertilising, and for the lines. The little footpaths were marked out by Father Brown's feet; Margery and
her mother laughed well at his actions, for it looked like some kind of
dance. Mr Brown had seen gardeners do it when he was a little boy, and
he did it very nicely: he walked along the sides of the square, with one
foot turned a little out, and the other straight, taking such tiny steps
that his feet touched each other all the time. This tramped out a path
just wide enough for a person to walk. The wider path was marked with lines and raked. Margery thought, of course, all the flowers would be put in as the
vegetables were; but she found that it was not so. For some, her father
poked little holes with his finger; for some, he made very shallow
trenches; and some very small seeds were scattered lightly over the top
of the ground. Margery and her mother had taken so much pains in thinking out the
arrangement of the flowers, that perhaps you will like to hear just how
they designed that garden. At the back were the sweet peas, which would
grow tall, like a screen; on the two sides, for a kind of hedge, were
yellow sunflowers; and along the front edge were the gay nasturtiums. Margery planned that, so that she could look into the garden from the
front, but have it shut away from the vegetable patch by the tall
flowers on the sides. The two front corners had canariensis in them. Canariensis is a pretty creeper with golden blossoms, very dainty and
bright. And then, in little square patches all round the garden, were
planted London pride, blue bachelor's buttons, yellow marigolds, tall
larkspur, many-coloured asters, hollyhocks and stocks. All these lovely
flowers used to grow in our grandmothers' gardens, and if you don't know
what they look like, I hope you can find out next summer. Between the flowers and the middle path went the seeds for that
wonderful salad garden; all the things Mrs Brown had named to Margery
were there. Margery had never seen anything more wonderful than the
little round lettuce-seeds. They were so tiny that it did not seem
possible that green lettuce leaves could come from them. But they surely
would. Mother and father and Margery were late to supper that evening. But they
were all so happy that it did not matter. The last thing Margery
thought of, as she went to sleep at night, was the dear, smooth little
garden, with its funny footpath, and with the little sticks standing at
the ends of the rows, labelled "lettuce," "beets," "helianthus," and so
on. "I have a garden! I have a garden!" was Margery's last thought as she
went off to dreamland. THE LITTLE COTYLEDONS


This is another story about Margery's garden. The next morning after the garden was planted, Margery was up and out at
six o'clock. She could not wait to look at her garden. To be sure, she
knew that the seeds could not sprout in a single night, but she had a
feeling that _something_ might happen at any moment. The garden was just
as smooth and brown as the night before, and no little seedlings were in
sight. But a very few mornings after that, when Margery went out, she saw a
funny little crack opening up through the earth, the whole length of the
patch. Quickly she knelt down on the footpath, to see. Yes! Tiny green
leaves, a whole row of them, were pushing their way through the crust! Margery knew what she had put there: it was the radish-row; these must
be radish leaves. She examined them very closely, so that she might
know a radish next time. The little leaves, no bigger than half your
little-finger nail, grew in twos,--two on each tiny stem; they were
almost round. Margery flew back to her mother, to say that the first seeds were up. And her mother, nearly as excited as Margery, came to look at the little
crack. Each day, after that, the row of radishes grew, till, in a week, it
stood as high as your finger, green and sturdy. But about the third day,
while Margery was stooping over the radishes, she saw something very,
very small and green, peeping above ground, where the lettuce was
planted. Could it be weeds? No, for on looking very closely she saw that
the wee leaves faintly marked a regular row. They did not make a crack,
like the radishes; they seemed too small and too far apart to push the
earth up like that. Margery leaned down and looked with all her eyes at
the baby plants. The tiny leaves grew two on a stem, and were almost
round. The more she looked at them the more it seemed to Margery that
they looked exactly as the radish looked when it first came up. "Do you
suppose," Margery said to herself, "that lettuce and radish look alike
while they are growing? They don't look alike when they are on the
table!" Day by day the lettuce grew, and soon the little round leaves were
easier to examine; they certainly were very much like radish leaves. Then, one morning, while she was searching for signs of other seeds,
Margery discovered the beets. In irregular patches on the row, hints of
green were coming. The next day and the next they grew, until the beet
leaves were big enough to see. Margery looked. Then she looked again. Then she wrinkled her forehead. "Can we have made a mistake?" she thought. "Do you suppose we can have
planted _all_ radishes?" For those little beet leaves were almost round, and they grew two on a
stem, precisely like the lettuce and the radish; except for the size,
all three rows looked alike. It was too much for Margery. She ran to the house and found her father. Her little face was so anxious that he thought something unpleasant had
happened. "Papa," she said, all out of breath, "do you think we could
have made a mistake about my garden? Do you think we could have put
radishes in all the rows?" Father laughed. "What makes you think such a thing?" he asked. "Papa," said Margery, "the little leaves all look exactly alike! every
plant has just two tiny leaves on it, and shaped the same; they are
roundish, and grow out of the stem at the same place." Papa's eyes began to twinkle. "Many of the dicotyledonous plants look
alike at the beginning," he said, with a little drawl on the big word. That was to tease Margery, because she always wanted to know the big
words she heard. "What's 'dicotyledonous'?" said Margery, carefully. "Wait till I come home to-night, dear," said her father, "and I'll tell
you." That evening Margery was waiting eagerly for him. When her father
finished his supper they went together to the garden, and father
examined the seedlings carefully. Then he pulled up a little radish
plant and a tiny beet. "These little leaves," he said, "are not the real leaves of the plant;
they are only little pockets to hold food for the plant to live on till
it gets strong enough to push up into the air. As soon as the real
leaves come out and begin to draw food from the air, these little
substitutes wither up and fall off. These two lie folded up in the
little seed from the beginning, and are full of plant food. They don't
have to be very special in shape, you see, because they don't stay on
the plant after it is grown up." "Then every plant looks like this at first?" said Margery. "No, dear, not every one; plants are divided into two kinds: those which
have two food leaves, like these plants, and those which have only one;
these are called dicotyledonous, and the ones which have but one food
leaf are monocotyledonous. Many of the dicotyledons look alike." "I think that is interesting," said Margery. "I always, supposed the plants were different from the minute they began
to grow." "Indeed, no," said father. "Even some of the trees look like this when
they first come through; you would not think a birch tree could look
like a vegetable or a flower, would you? But it does, at first; it looks
so much like these things that in the great nurseries, where trees are
raised for forests and parks, the workmen have to be very carefully
trained, or else they would pull up the trees when they are weeding. They have to be taught the difference between a birch tree and a weed." "How funny!" said Margery, dimpling. "Yes, it sounds funny," said father; "but, you see, the birch tree is
dicotyledonous, and so are many weeds, and the dicotyledons look so much
alike at first." "I am glad to know that, father," said Margery, soberly. "I believe I
shall learn a good deal from living in the country; don't you think so?" Margery's father took her in his arms. "I hope so, dear," he said; "the
country is a good place for little girls." And that was all that happened, that day. THE TALKATIVE TORTOISE


Once upon a time, a Tortoise lived in a pond with two Ducks, who were
her very good friends. She enjoyed the company of the Ducks, because she
could talk with them to her heart's content; the Tortoise liked to talk. She always had something to say, and she liked to hear herself say it. After many years of this pleasant living, the pond became very low, in a
dry season; and finally it dried up. The two Ducks saw that they could
no longer live there, so they decided to fly to another region, where
there was more water. They went to the Tortoise to bid her good-bye. "Oh, don't leave me behind!" begged the Tortoise. "Take me with you; I
must die if I am left here." "But you cannot fly!" said the Ducks. "How can we take you with us?" "Take me with you! take me with you!" said the Tortoise. The Ducks felt so sorry for her that at last they thought of a way to
take her. "We have thought of a way which will be possible," they said,
"if only you can manage to keep still long enough. We will each take
hold of one end of a stout stick, and do you take the middle in your
mouth; then we will fly up in the air with you and carry you with us. But remember not to talk! If you open your mouth, you are lost." The Tortoise said she would not say a word; she would not so much as
move her mouth; and she was very grateful. So the Ducks brought a strong
little stick and took hold of the ends, while the Tortoise bit firmly on
the middle. Then the two Ducks rose slowly in the air and flew away with
their burden. When they were above the treetops, the Tortoise wanted to say, "How high
we are!" But she remembered, and kept still. When they passed the church
steeple she wanted to say, "What is that which shines?" But she
remembered, and held her peace. Then they came over the village square,
and the people looked up and saw them. "Look at the Ducks carrying a
Tortoise!" they shouted; and every one ran to look. The Tortoise wanted
to say, "What business is it of yours?" But she didn't. Then she heard
the people shout, "Isn't it strange! Look at it! Look!" The Tortoise forgot everything except that she wanted to say, "Hush, you
foolish people!" She opened her mouth,--and fell to the ground. And that
was the end of the Tortoise. It is a very good thing to be able to hold one's tongue! ROBERT OF SICILY


An old legend says that there was once a king named Robert of Sicily,
who was brother to the Great Pope of Rome and to the Emperor of
Allemaine. He was a very selfish king, and very proud; he cared more for
his pleasures than for the needs of his people, and his heart was so
filled with his own greatness that he had no thought for God. One day, this proud king was sitting in his place at church, at vesper
service; his courtiers were about him, in their bright garments, and he
himself was dressed in his royal robes. The choir was chanting the Latin
service, and as the beautiful voices swelled louder, the king noticed
one particular verse which seemed to be repeated again and again. He
turned to a learned clerk at his side and asked what those words meant,
for he knew no Latin. "They mean, 'He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and hath
exalted them of low degree,'" answered the clerk. "It is well the words are in Latin, then," said the king angrily, "for
they are a lie. There is no power on earth or in heaven which can put me
down from my seat!" and he sneered at the beautiful singing, as he
leaned back in his place. Presently the king fell asleep, while the service went on. He slept
deeply and long. When he awoke the church was dark and still, and he was
all alone. He, the king, had been left alone in the church, to awake in
the dark! He was furious with rage and surprise, and, stumbling through
the dim aisles, he reached the great doors and beat at them, madly,
shouting for his servants. The old sexton heard some one shouting and pounding in the church, and
thought it was some drunken vagabond who had stolen in during the
service. He came to the door with his keys and called out, "Who is
there?" "Open! open! It is I, the king!" came a hoarse, angry voice from within. "It is a crazy man," thought the sexton; and he was frightened. He
opened the doors carefully and stood back, peering into the darkness. Out past him rushed the figure of a man in tattered, scanty clothes,
with unkempt hair and white, wild face. The sexton did not know that he
had ever seen him before, but he looked long after him, wondering at his
wildness and his haste. In his fluttering rags, without hat or cloak, not knowing what strange
thing had happened to him, King Robert rushed to his palace gates,
pushed aside the startled servants, and hurried, blind with rage, up the
wide stair and through the great corridors, toward the room where he
could hear the sound of his courtiers' voices. Men and women servants
tried to stop the ragged man, who had somehow got into the palace, but
Robert did not even see them as he fled along. Straight to the open
doors of the big banquet hall he made his way, and into the midst of the
grand feast there. The great hall was filled with lights and flowers; the tables were set
with everything that is delicate and rich to eat; the courtiers, in
their gay clothes, were laughing and talking; and at the head of the
feast, on the king's own throne, sat a king. His face, his figure, his
voice were exactly like Robert of Sicily; no human being could have told
the difference; no one dreamed that he was not the king. He was dressed
in the king's royal robes, he wore the royal crown, and on his hand was
the king's own ring. Robert of Sicily, half naked, ragged, without a
sign of his kingship on him, stood before the throne and stared with
fury at this figure of himself. The king on the throne looked at him. "Who art thou, and what dost thou
here?" he asked. And though his voice was just like Robert's own, it had
something in it sweet and deep, like the sound of bells. "I am the king!" cried Robert of Sicily. "I am the king, and you are an
impostor!" The courtiers started from their seats, and drew their swords. They
would have killed the crazy man who insulted their king; but he raised
his hand and stopped them, and with his eyes looking into Robert's eyes
he said, "Not the king; you shall be the king's jester! You shall wear
the cap and bells, and make laughter for my court. You shall be the
servant of the servants, and your companion shall, be the jester's ape." With shouts of laughter, the courtiers drove Robert of Sicily from the
banquet hall; the waiting-men, with laughter, too, pushed him into the
soldiers' hall; and there the pages brought the jester's wretched ape,
and put a fool's cap and bells on Robert's head. It was like a terrible
dream; he could not believe it true, he could not understand what had
happened to him. And when he woke next morning, he believed it was a
dream, and that he was king again. But as he turned his head, he felt
the coarse straw under his cheek instead of the soft pillow, and he saw
that he was in the stable, with the shivering ape by his side. Robert of
Sicily was a jester, and no one knew him for the king. Three long years passed. Sicily was happy and all things went well under
the king, who was not Robert. Robert was still the jester, and his heart
grew harder and more bitter with every year. Many times, during the
three years, the king, who had his face and voice, had called him to
himself, when none else could hear, and had asked him the one question,
"Who art thou?" And each time that he asked it his eyes looked into
Robert's eyes, to find his heart. But each time Robert threw back his
head and answered, proudly, "I am the king!" And the other king's eyes
grew sad and stern. At the end of three years, the Pope called the Emperor of Allemaine and
the King of Sicily, his brothers, to a great meeting in his city of
Rome. The King of Sicily went, with all his soldiers and courtiers and
servants,--a great procession of horsemen and footmen. Never had there
been seen a finer sight than the grand train, men in bright armour,
riders in wonderful cloaks of velvet and silk, servants, carrying
marvellous presents to the Pope. And at the very end rode Robert, the
jester. His horse was poor and old, many-coloured, and the ape rode with
him. Every one in the villages through which they passed ran after the
jester, and pointed and laughed. The Pope received his brothers and their trains in the square before
Saint Peter's. With music and flags and flowers he made the King of
Sicily welcome, and greeted him as his brother. In the midst of it, the
jester broke through the crowd and threw himself before the Pope. "Look
at me!" he cried; "I am your brother, Robert of Sicily! This man is an
impostor, who has stolen my throne. I am Robert, the king!" The Pope looked at the poor jester with pity, but the Emperor of
Allemaine turned to the King of Sicily, and said, "Is it not rather
dangerous, brother, to keep a madman as jester?" And again Robert was
pushed back among the serving-men. It was Holy Week, and the king and the emperor, with all their trains,
went every day to the great services in the cathedral. Something
wonderful and holy seemed to make these services more beautiful than
ever before. All the people of Rome felt it: it was as if the presence
of an angel were there. Men thought of God, and felt His blessing on
them. But no one knew who it was that brought the beautiful feeling. And
when Easter Day came, never had there been so lovely, so holy a day: in
the great churches, filled with flowers, and sweet with incense, the
kneeling people listened to the choirs singing, and it was like the
voices of angels; their prayers were more earnest than ever before,
their praise more glad; there was something heavenly in Rome. Robert of Sicily went to the services with the rest, and sat in the
humblest place with the servants. Over and over again he heard the
sweet voices of the choirs chant the Latin words he had heard long ago:
_He hath put down the mighty from their seat, and hath exalted them of
low degree_. And at last, as he listened, his heart was softened. He,
too, felt the strange blessed presence of a heavenly power. He thought
of God, and of his own wickedness; he remembered how selfish he had
been, and how little good he had done; he realised, that his power had
not been from himself, at all. On Easter night, as he crept to his bed
of straw, he wept, not because he was so wretched, but because he had
not been a better king when power was his. At last all the festivities were over, and the King of Sicily went home
to his own land again, with his people. Robert the jester came home too. On the day of their home-coming, there was a special service in the
royal church, and even after the service was over for the people, the
monks held prayers of thanksgiving and praise. The sound of their
singing came softly in at the palace windows. In the great banquet room,
the king sat, wearing his royal robes and his crown, while many subjects
came to greet him. At last, he sent them all away, saying he wanted to
be alone; but he commanded the jester to stay. And when they were alone
together the king looked into Robert's eyes, as he had done before, and
said, softly, "Who art thou?" Robert of Sicily bowed his head. "Thou knowest best," he said, "I only
know that I have sinned." As he spoke, he heard the voices of the monks singing, _He hath put down
the mighty from their seat_,--and his head sank lower. But suddenly the
music seemed to change; a wonderful light shone all about. As Robert
raised his eyes, he saw the face of the king smiling at him with a
radiance like nothing on earth, and as he sank to his knees before the
glory of that smile, a voice sounded with the music, like a melody
throbbing on a single string,--

"I am an angel, and thou art the king!" Then Robert of Sicily was alone. His royal robes were upon him once
more; he wore his crown and his royal ring. He was king. And when the
courtiers came back they found their king kneeling by his throne,
absorbed in silent prayer. THE JEALOUS COURTIERS


I wonder if you have ever heard the anecdote about the artist of
Duesseldorf and the jealous courtiers. This is it. It seems there was
once a very famous artist who lived in the little town of Duesseldorf. He
did such fine work that the Elector, Prince Johann Wilhelm, ordered a
portrait statue of himself, on horseback, to be done in bronze. The
artist was overjoyed at the commission, and worked early and late at the
statue. At last the work was done, and the artist had the great statue set up in
the public square of Duesseldorf, ready for the opening view. The Elector
came on the appointed day, and with him came his favourite courtiers
from the castle. Then the statue was unveiled. It was very
beautiful,--so beautiful that the prince exclaimed in surprise. He could
not look enough, and presently he turned to the artist and shook hands
with him, like an old friend. "Herr Grupello," he said, "you are a great
artist, and this statue will make your fame even greater than it is; the
portrait of me is perfect!" When the courtiers heard this, and saw the friendly hand-shake, their
jealousy of the artist was beyond bounds. Their one thought was, how
could they safely do something to humiliate him. They dared not pick
flaws in the portrait statue, for the prince had declared it perfect. But at last one of them said, with an air of great frankness, "Indeed,
Herr Grupello, the portrait of his Royal Highness is perfect; but permit
me to say that the statue of the horse is not quite so successful: the
head is too large; it is out of proportion." "No," said another, "the horse is really not so successful; the turn of
the neck, there, is awkward." "If you would change the right hind-foot, Herr Grupello," said a third,
"it would be an improvement." Still another found fault with the horse's tail. The artist listened, quietly. When they had all finished, he turned to
the prince and said, "Your courtiers, prince, find a good many flaws in
the statue of the horse; will you permit me to keep it a few days more,
to do what I can with it?" The Elector assented, and the artist ordered a temporary screen to be
built around the statue, so that his assistants could work undisturbed. For several days the sound of hammering came steadily from behind the
enclosure. The courtiers, who took care to pass that way, often, were
delighted. Each one said to himself, "I must have been right, really;
the artist himself sees that something was wrong; now I shall have
credit for saving the prince's portrait by my artistic taste!" Once more the artist summoned the prince and his courtiers, and once
more the statue was unveiled. Again the Elector exclaimed at its beauty,
and then he turned to his courtiers, one after another, to see what they
had to say. "Perfect!" said the first. "Now that the horse's head is in proportion,
there is not a flaw." "The change in the neck was just what was needed," said the second; "it
is very graceful now." "The rear right foot is as it should be, now," said a third, "and it
adds so much to the beauty of the whole!" The fourth said that he considered the tail greatly improved. "My courtiers are much pleased now," said the prince to Herr Grupello;
"they think the statue much improved by the changes you have made." Herr Grupello smiled a little. "I am glad they are pleased," he said,
"but the fact is, I have changed nothing!" "What do you mean?" said the prince in surprise. "Have we not heard the
sound of hammering every day? What were you hammering at then?" "I was hammering at the reputation of your courtiers, who found fault
simply because they were jealous," said the artist. "And I rather think
that their reputation is pretty well hammered to pieces!" It was, indeed. The Elector laughed heartily, but the courtiers slunk
away, one after another, without a word. PRINCE CHERRY

There was once an old king, so wise and kind and true that the most
powerful good fairy of his land visited him and asked him to name the
dearest wish of his heart, that she might grant it. "Surely you know it," said the good king; "it is for my only son, Prince
Cherry; do for him whatever you would have done for me." "Gladly," said the great fairy; "choose what I shall give him. I can
make him the richest, the most beautiful, or the most powerful prince in
the world; choose." "None of those things are what I want," said the king. "I want only that
he shall be good. Of what use will it be to him to be beautiful, rich,
or powerful, if he grows into a bad man? Make him the best prince in the
world, I beg you!" "Alas, I cannot make him good," said the fairy; "he must do that for
himself. I can give him good advice, reprove him when he does wrong, and
punish him if he will not punish himself; I can and will be his best
friend, but I cannot make him good unless he wills it." The king was sad to hear this, but he rejoiced in the friendship of the
fairy for his son. And when he died, soon after, he was happy to know
that he left Prince Cherry in her hands. Prince Cherry grieved for his father, and often lay awake at night,
thinking of him. One night, when he was all alone in his room, a soft
and lovely light suddenly shone before him, and a beautiful vision stood
at his side. It was the good fairy. She was clad in robes of dazzling
white, and on her shining hair she wore a wreath of white roses. "I am the Fairy Candide," she said to the prince. "I promised your
father that I would be your best friend, and as long as you live I shall
watch over your happiness. I have brought you a gift; it is not
wonderful to look at, but it has a wonderful power for your welfare;
wear it, and let it help you." As she spoke, she placed a small gold ring on the prince's little
finger. "This ring," she said, "will help you to be good; when you do
evil, it will prick you, to remind you. If you do not heed its warnings
a worse thing will happen to you, for I shall become your enemy." Then
she vanished. Prince Cherry wore his ring, and said nothing to anyone of the fairy's
gift. It did not prick him for a long time, because he was good and
merry and happy. But Prince Cherry had been rather spoiled by his nurse
when he was a child; she had always said to him that when he should
become king he could do exactly as he pleased. Now, after a while, he
began to find out that this was not true, and it made him angry. The first time that he noticed that even a king could not always have
his own way was on a day when he went hunting. It happened that he got
no game. This put him in such a bad temper that he grumbled and scolded
all the way home. The little gold ring began to feel tight and
uncomfortable. When he reached the palace his pet dog ran to meet him. "Go away!" said the prince, crossly. But the little dog was so used to being petted that he only jumped up on
his master, and tried to kiss his hand. The prince turned and kicked the
little creature. At the instant, he felt a sharp prick in his little
finger, like a pin prick. "What nonsense!" said the prince to himself. "Am I not king of the whole
land? May I not kick my own dog, if I choose? What evil is there in
that?" A silver voice spoke in his ear: "The king of the land has a right to do
good, but not evil; you have been guilty of bad temper and of cruelty
to-day; see that you do better to-morrow." The prince turned sharply, but no one was to be seen; yet he recognised
the voice as that of Fairy Candide. He followed her advice for a little, but presently he forgot, and the
ring pricked him so sharply that his finger had a drop of blood on it. This happened again and again, for the prince grew more self-willed and
headstrong every day; he had some bad friends, too, who urged him on, in
the hope that he would ruin himself and give them a chance to seize the
throne. He treated his people carelessly and his servants cruelly, and
everything he wanted he felt that he must have. The ring annoyed him terribly; it was embarrassing for a king to have a
drop of blood on his finger all the time! At last he took the ring off
and put it out of sight. Then he thought he should be perfectly happy,
having his own way; but instead, he grew more unhappy as he grew less
good. Whenever he was crossed, or could not have his own way instantly,
he flew into a passion. Finally, he wanted something that he really could not have. This time it
was a most beautiful young girl, named Zelia; the prince saw her, and
loved her so much that he wanted at once to make her his queen. To his
great astonishment, she refused. "Am I not pleasing to you?" asked the prince in surprise. "You are very handsome, very charming, prince," said Zelia; "but you are
not like the good king, your father; I fear you would make me very
miserable if I were your queen." In a great rage, Prince Cherry ordered the young girl to be put in
prison; and the key of her dungeon he kept. He told one of his friends,
a wicked man who flattered him for his own purposes, about the thing,
and asked his advice. "Are you not king?" said the bad friend. "May you not do as you will? Keep the girl in a dungeon till she does as you command, and if she will
not, sell her as a slave." "But would it not be a disgrace for me to harm an innocent creature?" said the prince. "It would be a disgrace to you to have it said that one of your subjects
dared disobey you!" said the courtier. He had cleverly touched the prince's worst trait, his pride. Prince
Cherry went at once to Zelia's dungeon, prepared to do this cruel thing. Zelia was gone. No one had the key save the prince himself; yet she was
gone. The only person who could have dared to help her, thought the
prince, was his old tutor, Suliman, the only man left who ever rebuked
him for anything. In fury, he ordered Suliman to be put in fetters and
brought before him. As his servants left him, to carry out the wicked order, there was a
clash, as of thunder, in the room, and then a blinding light. Fairy
Candide stood before him. Her beautiful face was stern, and her silver
voice rang like a trumpet, as she said, "Wicked and selfish prince, you
have become baser than the beasts you hunt; you are furious as a lion,
revengeful as a serpent, greedy as a wolf, and brutal as a bull; take,
therefore, the shape of those beasts whom you resemble!" With horror, the prince felt himself being transformed into a monster. He tried to rush upon the fairy and kill her, but she had vanished with
her words. As he stood, her voice came from the air, saying, sadly,
"Learn to conquer your pride by being in submission to your own
subjects." At the same moment, Prince Cherry felt himself being
transported to a distant forest, where he was set down by a clear
stream. In the water he saw his own terrible image; he had the head of a
lion, with bull's horns, the feet of a wolf, and a tail like a serpent. And as he gazed in horror, the fairy's voice whispered, "Your soul has
become more ugly than your shape is; you yourself have deformed it." The poor beast rushed away from the sound of her words, but in a moment
he stumbled into a trap, set by bear-catchers. When the trappers found
him they were delighted to have caught a curiosity, and they immediately
dragged him to the palace courtyard. There he heard the whole court
buzzing with gossip. Prince Cherry had been struck by lightning and
killed, was the news, and the five favourite courtiers had struggled to
make themselves rulers, but the people had refused them, and offered the
crown to Suliman, the good old tutor. Even as he heard this, the prince saw Suliman on the steps of the
palace, speaking to the people. "I will take the crown to keep in
trust," he said. "Perhaps the prince is not dead." "He was a bad king; we do not want him back," said the people. "I know his heart," said Suliman, "it is not all bad; it is tainted, but
not corrupt; perhaps he will repent and come back to us a good king." When the beast heard this, it touched him so much that he stopped
tearing at his chains, and became gentle. He let his keepers lead him
away to the royal menagerie without hurting them. Life was very terrible to the prince, now, but he began to see that he
had brought all his sorrow on himself, and he tried to bear it
patiently. The worst to bear was the cruelty of the keeper. At last, one
night, this keeper was in great danger; a tiger got loose, and attacked
him. "Good enough! Let him die!" thought Prince Cherry. But when he saw
how helpless the keeper was, he repented, and sprang to help. He killed
the tiger and saved the keeper's life. As he crouched at the keeper's feet, a voice said, "Good actions never
go unrewarded!" And the terrible monster was changed into a pretty
little white dog. The keeper carried the beautiful little dog to the court and told the
story, and from then on, Cherry was carefully treated, and had the best
of everything. But in order to keep the little dog from growing, the
queen ordered that he should be fed very little, and that was pretty
hard for the poor prince. He was often half starved, although so much
petted. One day he had carried his crust of bread to a retired spot in the
palace woods, where he loved to be, when he saw a poor old woman hunting
for roots, and seeming almost starved. "Poor thing," he thought, "she is even more hungry than I"; and he ran
up and dropped the crust at her feet. The woman ate it, and seemed greatly refreshed. Cherry was glad of that, and he was running happily back to his kennel
when he heard cries of distress, and suddenly he saw some rough men
dragging along a young girl, who was weeping and crying for help. What
was his horror to see that the young girl was Zelia! Oh, how he wished
he were the monster once more, so that he could kill the men and rescue
her! But he could do nothing except bark, and bite at the heels of the
wicked men. That did not stop them; they drove him off, with blows, and
carried Zelia into a palace in the wood. Poor Cherry crouched by the steps, and watched. His heart was full of
pity and rage. But suddenly he thought, "I was as bad as these men; I
myself put Zelia in prison, and would have treated her worse still, if I
had not been prevented." The thought made him so sorry and ashamed that
he repented bitterly the evil he had done. Presently a window opened, and Cherry saw Zelia lean out and throw down
a piece of meat. He seized it and was just going to devour it, when the
old woman to whom he had given his crust snatched it away and took him
in her arms. "No, you shall not eat it, you poor little thing," she
said, "for every bit of food in that house is poisoned." At the same moment, a voice said, "Good actions never go unrewarded!" And instantly Prince Cherry was transformed into a little white dove. With great joy, he flew to the open palace window to seek out his Zelia,
to try to help her. But though he hunted in every room, no Zelia was to
be found. He had to fly away, without seeing her. He wanted more than
anything else to find her, and stay near her, so he flew out into the
world, to seek her. He sought her in many lands, until one day, in a far eastern country, he
found her sitting in a tent, by the side of an old, white-haired hermit. Cherry was wild with delight. He flew to her shoulder, caressed her hair
with his beak, and cooed in her ear. "You dear, lovely little thing!" said Zelia. "Will you stay with me? If
you will, I will love you always." "Ah, Zelia, see what you have done!" laughed the hermit. At that
instant, the white dove vanished, and Prince Cherry stood there, as
handsome and charming as ever, and with a look of kindness and modesty
in his eyes which had never been there before. At the same time, the
hermit stood up, his flowing hair changed to shining gold, and his face
became a lovely woman's face; it was the Fairy Candide. "Zelia has
broken your spell," she said to the prince, "as I meant she should, when
you were worthy of her love." Zelia and Prince Cherry fell at the fairy's feet. But with a beautiful
smile she bade them come to their kingdom. In a trice, they were
transported to the prince's palace, where King Suliman greeted them with
tears of joy. He gave back the throne with all his heart, and King
Cherry ruled again, with Zelia for his queen. He wore the little gold ring all the rest of his life, but never once
did it have to prick him hard enough to make his finger bleed. THE GOLD IN THE ORCHARD


There was once a farmer who had a fine olive orchard. He was very
industrious, and the farm always prospered under his care. But he knew
that his three sons despised the farm work, and were eager to make
wealth fast, through adventure. When the farmer was old, and felt that his time had come to die, he
called the three sons to him and said, "My sons, there is a pot of gold
hidden in the olive orchard. Dig for it, if you wish it." The sons tried to get him to tell them in what part of the orchard the
gold was hidden; but he would tell them nothing more. After the farmer was dead, the sons went to work to find the pot of
gold; since they did not know where the hiding-place was, they agreed to
begin in a line, at one end of the orchard, and to dig until one of them
should find the money. They dug until they had turned up the soil from one end of the orchard
to the other, round the tree-roots and between them. But no pot of gold
was to be found. It seemed as if some one must have stolen it, or as if
the farmer had been wandering in his wits. The three sons were bitterly
disappointed to have all their work for nothing. The next olive season, the olive trees in the orchard bore more fruit
than they had ever given before; the fine cultivating they had had from
the digging brought so much fruit, and of so fine a quality, that when
it was sold it gave the sons a whole pot of gold! And when they saw how much money had come from the orchard, they
suddenly understood what the wise father had meant when he said, "There
is gold hidden in the orchard; dig for it." MARGARET OF NEW ORLEANS


If you ever go to the beautiful city of New Orleans, somebody will be
sure to take you down into the old business part of the city, where
there are banks and shops and hotels, and show you a statue which stands
in a little square there. It is the statue of a woman, sitting in a low
chair, with her arms around a child, who leans against her. The woman is
not at all pretty: she wears thick, common shoes, a plain dress, with a
little shawl, and a sun-bonnet; she is stout and short, and her face is
a square-chinned Irish face; but her eyes look at you like your
mother's. Now there is something very surprising about this statue: it was the
first one that was ever made in America in honour of a woman. Even in
Europe there are not many monuments to women, and most of the few are to
great queens or princesses, very beautiful and very richly dressed. You
see, this statue in New Orleans is not quite like anything else. It is the statue of a woman named Margaret. Her whole name was Margaret
Haughery, but no one in New Orleans remembers her by it, any more than
you think of your dearest sister by her full name; she is just Margaret. This is her story, and it tells why people made a monument for her. When Margaret was a tiny baby, her father and mother died, and she was
adopted by two young people as poor and as kind as her own parents. She
lived with them until she grew up. Then she married, and had a little
baby of her own. But very soon her husband died, and then the baby died,
too, and Margaret was all alone in the world. She was poor, but she was
strong, and knew how to work. All day, from morning until evening, she ironed clothes in a laundry. And every day, as she worked by the window, she saw the little
motherless children from the orphan asylum, near by, working and
playing about. After a while, there came a great sickness upon the city,
and so many mothers and fathers died that there were more orphans than
the asylum could possibly take care of. They needed a good friend, now. You would hardly think, would you, that a poor woman who worked in a
laundry could be much of a friend to them? But Margaret was. She went
straight to the kind Sisters who had the asylum and told them she was
going to give them part of her wages and was going to work for them,
besides. Pretty soon she had worked so hard that she had some money
saved from her wages. With this, she bought two cows and a little
delivery cart. Then she carried her milk to her customers in the little
cart every morning; and as she went, she begged the pieces of food left
over from the hotels and rich houses, and brought it back in the cart to
the hungry children in the asylum. In the very hardest times that was
often all the food the poor children had. A part of the money Margaret earned went every week to the asylum, and
after a few years that was made very much larger and better. Margaret
was so careful and so good at business that, in spite of her giving, she
bought more cows and earned more money. With this, she built a home for
orphan babies; she called it her baby house. After a time, Margaret had a chance to get a bakery, and then she became
a bread-woman instead of a milk-woman. She carried the bread just as she
had carried the milk, in her cart. And still she kept giving money to
the asylum. Then the great war came, the Civil War. In all the trouble
and sickness and fear of that time, Margaret drove her cart of bread;
and somehow she had always enough to give the starving soldiers, and for
her babies, beside what she sold. And despite all this, she earned
enough so that when the war was over she built a big steam factory for
her bread. By this time everybody in the city knew her. The children all
over the city loved her; the business men were proud of her; the poor
people all came to her for advice. She used to sit at the open door of
her office, in a calico gown and a little shawl, and give a good word to
everybody, rich or poor. Then, by and by, one day, Margaret died. And when it was time to read
her will, the people found that, with all her giving, she had still
saved a great deal of money, and that she had left every penny of it to
the different orphan asylums of the city,--each one of them was given
something. Whether they were for white children or black, for Jews,
Catholics, or Protestants, made no difference; for Margaret always said,
"They are all orphans alike." And just think, dears, that splendid,
wise will was signed with a cross instead of a name, for Margaret had
never learned to read or write! When the people of New Orleans knew that Margaret was dead, they said,
"She was a mother to the motherless; she was a friend to those who had
no friends; she had wisdom greater than schools can teach; we will not
let her memory go from us." So they made a statue of her, just as she
used to look, sitting in her own office door, or driving in her own
little cart. And there it stands to-day, in memory of the great love and
the great power of plain Margaret Haughery, of New Orleans. THE DAGDA'S HARP


You know, dears, in the old countries there are many fine stories about
things which happened so very long ago that nobody knows exactly how
much of them is true. Ireland is like that. It is so old that even as
long ago as four thousand years it had people who dug in the mines, and
knew how to weave cloth and to make beautiful ornaments out of gold, and
who could fight and make laws; but we do not know just where they came
from, nor exactly how they lived. These people left us some splendid
stories about their kings, their fights, and their beautiful women; but
it all happened such a long time ago that the stories are mixtures of
things that really happened and what people said about them, and we
don't know just which is which. The stories are called _legends_. One of
the prettiest legends is the story I am going to tell you about the
Dagda's harp. It is said that there were two quite different kinds of people in
Ireland: one set of people with long dark hair and dark eyes, called
Fomorians--they carried long slender spears made of golden bronze when
they fought--and another race of people who were golden-haired and
blue-eyed, and who carried short, blunt, heavy spears of dull metal. The golden-haired people had a great chieftain who was also a kind of
high priest, who was called the Dagda. And this Dagda had a wonderful
magic harp. The harp was beautiful to look upon, mighty in size, made of
rare wood, and ornamented with gold and jewels; and it had wonderful
music in its strings, which only the Dagda could call out. When the men
were going out to battle, the Dagda would set up his magic harp and
sweep his hand across the strings, and a war song would ring out which
would make every warrior buckle on his armour, brace his knees, and
shout, "Forth to the fight!" Then, when the men came back from the
battle, weary and wounded, the Dagda would take his harp and strike a
few chords, and as the magic music stole out upon the air, every man
forgot his weariness and the smart of his wounds, and thought of the
honour he had won, and of the comrade who had died beside him, and of
the safety of his wife and children. Then the song would swell out
louder, and every warrior would remember only the glory he had helped
win for the king; and each man would rise at the great table, his cup in
his hand, and shout "Long live the King!" There came a time when the Fomorians and the golden-haired men were at
war; and in the midst of a great battle, while the Dagda's hall was not
so well guarded as usual, some of the chieftains of the Fomorians stole
the great harp from the wall, where it hung, and fled away with it. Their wives and children and some few of their soldiers went with them,
and they fled fast and far through the night, until they were a long way
from the battlefield. Then they thought they were safe, and they turned
aside into a vacant castle, by the road, and sat down to a banquet,
hanging the stolen harp on the wall. The Dagda, with two or three of his warriors, had followed hard on their
track. And while they were in the midst of their banqueting, the door
was suddenly burst open, and the Dagda stood there, with his men. Some
of the Fomorians sprang to their feet, but before any of them could
grasp a weapon, the Dagda called out to his harp on the wall, "Come to
me, O my harp!" The great harp recognised its master's voice, and leaped from the wall. Whirling through the hall, sweeping aside and killing the men who got in
its way, it sprang to its master's hand. And the Dagda took his harp and
swept his hand across the strings in three great, solemn chords. The
harp answered with the magic Music of Tears. As the wailing harmony
smote upon the air, the women of the Fomorians bowed their heads and
wept bitterly, the strong men turned their faces aside, and the little
children sobbed. Again the Dagda touched the strings, and this time the magic Music of
Mirth leaped from the harp. And when they heard that Music of Mirth, the
young warriors of the Fomorians began to laugh; they laughed till the
cups fell from their grasp, and the spears dropped from their hands,
while the wine flowed from the broken bowls; they laughed until their
limbs were helpless with excess of glee. Once more the Dagda touched his harp, but very, very softly. And now a
music stole forth as soft as dreams, and as sweet as joy: it was the
magic Music of Sleep. When they heard that, gently, gently, the Fomorian
women bowed their heads in slumber; the little children crept to their
mothers' laps; the old men nodded; and the young warriors drooped in
their seats and closed their eyes: one after another all the Fomorians
sank into sleep. When they were all deep in slumber, the Dagda took his magic harp, and
he and his golden-haired warriors stole softly away, and came in safety
to their own homes again. THE TAILOR AND THE THREE BEASTS


There was once a tailor in Galway, and he started out on a journey to go
to the king's court at Dublin. He had not gone far when he met a white horse, and he saluted him. "God save you," said the tailor. "God save you," said the horse. "Where are you going?" "I am going to Dublin," said the tailor, "to build a court for the king
and to get a lady for a wife, if I am able to do it." For, it seems the
king had promised his daughter and a great lot of money to anyone who
should be able to build up his court. The trouble was, that three giants
lived in the wood near the court, and every night they came out of the
wood and threw down all that was built by day. So nobody could get the
court built. "Would you make me a hole," said the old white garraun, "where I could
go in to hide whenever the people come to fetch me to the mill or the
kiln, so that they won't see me; for they tire me out doing work for
them?" "I'll do that, indeed," said the tailor, "and welcome." He brought his spade and shovel, and he made a hole, and he asked the
old white horse to go down into it so that he could see if it would fit
him. The white horse went down into the hole, but when he tried to come
up again, he was not able. "Make a place for me now," said the white horse, "by which I can come up
out of the hole here, whenever I am hungry." "I will not," said the tailor; "remain where you are until I come back,
and I'll lift you up." The tailor went forward next day, and the fox met him. "God save you," said the fox. "God save you," said the tailor. "Where are you going?" said the fox. "I'm going to Dublin, to try to make a court for the king." "Would you make a place for me where I can hide?" said the fox. "The
rest of the foxes are always beating me, and they will not allow me to
eat anything with them." "I'll do that for you," said the tailor. He took his axe and his saw, and he made a thing like a crate, and he
told the fox to get into it so that he could see whether it would fit
him. The fox went into it, and when the tailor had him down, he shut him
in. When the fox was satisfied at last that he had a nice place of it
within, he asked the tailor to let him out, and the tailor answered that
he would not. "Wait there until I come back again," said he. The tailor went forward the next day, and he had not walked very far
when he met a lion; and the lion greeted him. "God save you," said the lion. "God save you," said the tailor. "Where are you going?" said the lion. "I'm going to Dublin to make a court for the king if I am able to make
it," said the tailor. "If you were to make a plough for me," said the lion, "I and the other
lions could be ploughing and harrowing until we'd have a bit to eat in
the harvest." "I'll do that for you," said the tailor. He brought his axe and his saw, and he made a plough. When the plough
was made he put a hole in the beam of it, and got the lion to go in
under the plough so that he might see if he was any good as a
ploughman. He placed the lion's tail in the hole he had made for it, and
then clapped in a peg, and the lion was not able to draw out his tail
again. "Loose me now," said the lion, "and we'll fix ourselves and go
ploughing." The tailor said he would not loose him until he came back himself. He
left him there then, and he came to Dublin. When he arrived, he engaged workmen and began to build the court. At the
end of the day he had the workmen put a great stone on top of the work. When the great stone was raised up, the tailor put some sort of
contrivance under it, that he might be able to throw it down as soon as
the giants came near to it. The workpeople then went home, and the
tailor went in hiding behind the big stone. When the darkness of the night was come, he saw the three giants
arriving, and they began throwing down the court until they arrived at
the place where the tailor was in hiding up above, and one of them
struck a blow with his sledge on the place where he was. The tailor
threw down the stone, and it fell on him and killed him. The other two
went home then and left all of the court that was remaining without
throwing it down, since their companion was dead. The workmen came again the next day, and they were working until night,
and as they were going home the tailor told them to put up the big
stone on the top of the work, as it had been the night before. They did
that for him, went home, and the tailor went in hiding the same as he
did the evening before. When the people had all gone to rest, the two giants came, and they were
throwing down all that was before them, but as soon as they began, the
tailor commenced manoeuvring until he was able to throw down the great
stone, so that it fell upon the skull of the giant that was under him,
and it killed him. After this there was only the one giant left, and he
never came again until the court was finished. Then when the work was over, the tailor went to the king and told him to
give him his wife and his money, as he had the court finished; and the
king said he would not give him any wife until he had killed the other
giant, for he said that it was not by his strength he had killed the two
giants before, and that he would give him nothing now until he killed
the other one for him. Then the tailor said that he would kill the other
giant for him, and welcome; that there should be no delay at all about
that. The tailor went then till he came to the place where the other giant
was, and asked did he want a servant-boy. The giant said he did want
one, if he could get one who would do everything that he would do
himself. "Anything that you will do, I will do," said the tailor. They went to their dinner then, and when they had eaten it, the giant
asked the tailor "would he dare to swallow as much boiling broth as
himself." The tailor said, "I will certainly do that, but you must give
me an hour before we commence." The tailor went out then, and he got a
sheepskin, which he sewed up until he made a bag of it, and he slipped
it down under his coat. He came in then and told the giant first to
drink a gallon of the broth himself. The giant drank that up while it
was boiling. "I'll do that," said the tailor. He went on until it was
all poured into the skin, and the giant thought he had drunk it. The
giant drank another gallon then, and the tailor let another gallon down
into the skin, but the giant thought he was drinking it. "I'll do a thing now that you will not dare to do," said the tailor. "You will not," said the giant. "What is it you would do?" "Make a hole and let out the broth again," said the tailor. "Do it yourself first," said the giant. The tailor gave a prod of the knife, and he let the broth out of the
skin. "Now you do that," said he. "I will," said the giant, giving such a prod of the knife into his own
stomach that he killed himself. That is the way the tailor killed the
third giant. He went to the king then, and desired him to send him out his wife and
his money, saying that he would throw down the court again if he did not
do so immediately. They were afraid then that he would throw down the
court, and they sent the wife to him. When the tailor was a day gone, himself and his wife, they repented and
followed him to take his wife away from him again. The people who went
after him followed him until they came to the place where the lion was,
and the lion said to them, "The tailor and his wife were here yesterday. I saw them going by, and if you will loose me now, I am swifter than
you, and I will follow them until I overtake them." When they heard
that, they released the lion. The lion and the people of Dublin went on, and pursued the tailor, until
they came to the place where the fox was, and the fox greeted them, and
said, "The tailor and his wife were here this morning, and if you will
loose me, I am swifter than you, and I will follow them, and overtake
them." They therefore set the fox free. The lion and the fox and the army of Dublin went on then, trying to
catch the tailor, and they kept going until they came to the place
where the old white garraun was, and the old white garraun told them
that the tailor and his wife were there in the morning, and "Loose me,"
said he; "I am swifter than you, and I'll overtake them." They released
the old white garraun then, and the old white garraun, the fox, the
lion, and the army of Dublin pursued the tailor and his wife, and it was
not long before they came up with them. When the tailor saw them coming, he got out of the coach with his wife,
and he sat down on the ground. When the old white garraun saw the tailor sitting on the ground, he
said, "That's the position he was in when he made the hole for me, that
I couldn't get out of, when I went down into it. I'll go no nearer to
him." "No!" said the fox, "but that's the way he was when he was making the
thing for me, and I'll go no nearer to him." "No!" says the lion, "but that's the very way he had, when he was making
the plough that I was caught in. I'll go no nearer to him." They all left him then and returned. The tailor and his wife came home
to Galway. HOW THE SEA BECAME SALT


This story was told long ago by our Northern forefathers who brought it
with them in their dragon ships when they crossed the North Sea to
settle in England. In those days men were apt to invent stories to
account for things about them which seemed peculiar, and loving the sea
as they did, it is not strange that they had remarked the peculiarity of
the ocean water and had found a reason why it is so different from the
water in the rivers and steams. This is not the only story that has come down to tell us how people of
old accounted for the sea being salt. There are many such stories, each
different from the other, all showing that the same childlike spirit of
inquiry was at work in different places, striving to find an answer to
this riddle of nature. *       *       *       *       *

There sprang from the sons of Odin a race of men who became mighty kings
of the earth, and one of these, named Frode, ruled over the lands that
are called Denmark. Now about this time were found in Denmark two great millstones, so large
that no one had the strength to turn them. So Frode sent for all the
wise men of the land and bade them examine the stones and tell him of
what use they were, since no one could grind with them. And after the wise men had looked closely at them and read the magic
letters which were cut upon their edge, they said that the millstones
were precious indeed, since they would grind out of nothing anything
that the miller might wish. So King Frode sent messengers over the world to find for him two
servants who would be strong enough to grind with the millstones, and
after a long, long time his messengers found him two maid-servants, who
were bigger and stronger than anyone in Denmark had ever seen. But no
one guessed that these were really Giant-Maidens who bore a grudge
against all of the race of Odin. Directly the Giant-Maidens were brought before Frode, and before they
had rested after their long journey, or satisfied their hunger, he bade
them go to the mill, and grind for him gold and peace and happiness. "They sang and swung
      The swift mill stone,
      And with loud voice
      They made their moan. 'We grind for Frode
      Wealth and gold
      Abundant riches
      He shall behold.'" Presently Frode came into the mill to see that the new servants were
performing their task diligently. And as he watched them from the shadow
by the door, the maidens stayed their grinding for a while to rest. The greedy man could not bear to see even an instant's pause, and he
came out of the shadow, and bade them, with harsh words, go on grinding,
and cease not except for so long as the cuckoo was silent, or while he
himself sang a song. Now it was early summer-time, and the cuckoo was
calling all the day and most of the night. So the Giant-Maidens waxed very wroth with King Frode, and as they
resumed their labours they sang a song of the hardness of their lot in
the household of this pitiless King. They had been grinding out wealth and happiness and peace, but now they
bade the magic stones to grind something very different. Presently, as the great stones moved round and round, Frode, who still
stood by, heard one chant in a low, sing-song voice,--

"I see a fire east of the town--the curlews awake and sound a note of
warning. A host approaches in haste, to burn the dwelling of the king." And the next took up her song,--

"No longer will Frode sit on his throne, and rule over rings of red gold
and mighty millstones. Now must we grind with all our might--and,
behold! red warriors come forth--and revenge, and bloodshed, and ruin." Then Frode shook from head to foot in his terror, for he heard the tramp
of a mighty host of warriors advancing from the sea. And as he looked
for a way of escape, the braces of the millstones broke with the strong
grinding, and fell in two. And the whole world shook and trembled with
the mighty shock of that breaking. But through the crash and din came the voices of the Giant-Maidens,
loudly chanting,--

     "We have turned the stone round;
      Though weary the maidens,
      See what they have ground!" And that same night a mighty sea-king came up and slew Frode and
plundered his city. When he had sacked the city, the sea-king took on board his ship the two
Giant-Maidens, and with them the broken millstones. And he bade them
begin at once to grind salt, for of this he had very scanty store. So they ground and ground; and in the middle of the night, being weary,
they asked the sea-king if he had not got salt enough. But the sea-king was hard of heart, like Frode, and he roughly bade them
go on grinding. And the maidens did so, and worked to such effect that
within a short time the millstones had ground out so much salt that the
weight of it began to sink the ship. Down, down it sank, ship and giants
and millstones, and in that spot, in the very middle of the ocean, arose
a whirlpool, from whence the salt is carried north and south, east and
west, throughout the waters of the earth. And that is how the sea became salt. THE CASTLE OF FORTUNE


One lovely summer morning, just as the sun rose, two travellers started
on a journey. They were both strong young men, but one was a lazy fellow
and the other was a worker. As the first sunbeams came over the hills, they shone on a great castle
standing on the heights, as far away as the eye could see. It was a
wonderful and beautiful castle, all glistening towers that gleamed like
marble, and glancing windows that shone like crystal. The two young men
looked at it eagerly, and longed to go nearer. Suddenly, out of the distance, something like a great butterfly, of
white and gold, swept toward them. And when it came nearer, they saw
that it was a most beautiful lady, robed in floating garments as fine as
cobwebs and wearing on her head a crown so bright that no one could tell
whether it was of diamonds or of dew. She stood, light as air, on a
great, shining, golden ball, which rolled along with her, swifter than
the wind. As she passed the travellers, she turned her face to them and
smiled. "Follow me!" she said. The lazy man sat down in the grass with a discontented sigh. "She has
an easy time of it!" he said. But the industrious man ran after the lovely lady and caught the hem of
her floating robe in his grasp. "Who are you, and whither are you
going?" he asked. "I am the Fairy of Fortune," the beautiful lady said, "and that is my
castle. You may reach it to-day, if you will; there is time, if you
waste none. If you reach it before the last stroke of midnight, I will
receive you there, and will be your friend. But if you come one second
after midnight, it will be too late." When she had said this, her robe slipped from the traveller's hand and
she was gone. The industrious man hurried back to his friend, and told him what the
fairy had said. "The idea!" said the lazy, man, and he laughed; "of course, if we had a
horse there would be some chance, but _walk_ all that way? No, thank
you!" "Then good-bye," said his friend, "I am off." And he set out, down the
road toward the shining castle, with a good steady stride, his eyes
straight ahead. The lazy man lay down in the soft grass, and looked rather wistfully at
the far-away towers. "If only I had a good horse!" he sighed. Just at that moment he felt something warm nosing about at his shoulder,
and heard a little whinny. He turned round, and there stood a little
horse! It was a dainty creature, gentle-looking, and finely built, and
it was saddled and bridled. "Hello!" said the lazy man. "Luck often comes when one isn't looking for
it!" And in an instant he had leaped on the horse, and headed him for
the castle of fortune. The little horse started at a fine pace, and in a
very few minutes they overtook the other traveller, plodding along on
foot. "How do you like shank's pony?" laughed the lazy man, as he passed his
friend. The industrious man only nodded, and kept on with his steady stride,
eyes straight ahead. The horse kept his good pace, and by noon the towers of the castle stood
out against the sky, much nearer and more beautiful. Exactly at noon,
the horse turned aside from the road, into a shady grove on a hill, and
stopped. "Wise beast," said his rider: "'haste makes waste,' and all things are
better in moderation. I'll follow your example, and eat and rest a bit." He dismounted and sat down in the cool moss, with his back against a
tree. He had a lunch in his traveller's pouch, and he ate it
comfortably. Then he felt drowsy from the heat and the early ride, so he
pulled his hat over his eyes, and settled himself for a nap. "It will go
all the better for a little rest," he said. That _was_ a sleep! He slept like the seven sleepers, and he dreamed the
most beautiful things you could imagine. At last, he dreamed that he had
entered the castle of fortune and was being received with great
festivities. Everything he wanted was brought to him, and music played
while fireworks were set off in his honour. The music was so loud that
he awoke. He sat up, rubbing his eyes, and behold, the fireworks were
the very last rays of the setting sun, and the music was the voice of
the other traveller, passing the grove on foot! "Time to be off," said the lazy man, and looked about him for the pretty
horse. No horse was to be found. The only living thing near was an old,
bony, grey donkey. The man called, and whistled, and looked, but no
little horse appeared. After a long while he gave it up, and, since
there was nothing better to do, he mounted the old grey donkey and set
out again. The donkey was slow, and he was hard to ride, but he was better than
nothing; and gradually the lazy man saw the towers of the castle draw
nearer. Now it began to grow dark; in the castle windows the lights began to
show. Then came trouble! Slower, and slower, went the grey donkey;
slower, and slower, till, in the very middle of a pitch-black wood, he
stopped and stood still. Not a step would he budge for all the coaxing
and scolding and beating his rider could give. At last the rider kicked
him, as well as beat him, and at that the donkey felt that he had had
enough. Up went his hind heels, and down went his head, and over it went
the lazy man on to the stony ground. There he lay groaning for many minutes, for it was not a soft place, I
can assure you. How he wished he were in a soft, warm bed, with his
aching bones comfortable in blankets! The very thought of it made him
remember the Castle of Fortune, for he knew there must be fine beds
there. To get to those beds he was even willing to bestir his poor
limbs, so he sat up and felt about him for the donkey. No donkey was to be found. The lazy man crept round and round the spot where he had fallen,
scratched his hands on the stumps, tore his face in the briers, and
bumped his knees on the stones. But no donkey was there. He would have
laid down to sleep again, but he could hear now the howls of hungry
wolves in the woods; that it did not sound pleasant. Finally, his hand
struck against something that felt like a saddle. He grasped it,
thankfully, and started to mount his donkey. The beast he took hold of seemed very small, and, as he mounted, he felt
that its sides were moist and slimy. It gave him a shudder, and he
hesitated; but at that moment he heard a distant clock strike. It was
striking eleven! There was still time to reach the castle of fortune,
but no more than enough; so he mounted his new steed and rode on once
more. The animal was easier to sit on than the donkey, and the saddle
seemed remarkably high behind; it was good to lean against. But even the
donkey was not so slow as this; the new steed was slower than he. After
a while, however, he pushed his way out of the woods into the open, and
there stood the castle, only a little way ahead! All its windows were
ablaze with lights. A ray from them fell on the lazy man's beast, and he
saw what he was riding: it was a gigantic snail! a snail as large as a
calf! A cold shudder ran over the lazy man's body, and he would have got off
his horrid animal then and there, but just then the clock struck once
more. It was the first of the long, slow strokes that mark midnight! The
man grew frantic when he heard it. He drove his heels into the snail's
sides, to make him hurry. Instantly, the snail drew in his head, curled
up in his shell, and left the lazy man sitting in a heap on the ground! The clock struck twice. If the man had run for it, he could still have
reached the castle, but, instead, he sat still and shouted for a horse. "A beast, a beast!" he wailed, "any kind of a beast that will take me to
the castle!" The clock struck three times. And as it struck the third note, something
came rustling and rattling out of the darkness, something that sounded
like a horse with harness. The lazy man jumped on its back, a very
queer, low back. As he mounted, he saw the doors of the castle open, and
saw his friend standing on the threshold, waving his cap and beckoning
to him. The clock struck four times, and the new steed began to stir; as it
struck five, he moved a pace forward; as it struck six, he stopped; as
it struck seven, he turned himself about; as it struck eight, he began
to move backward, away from the castle! The lazy man shouted, and beat him, but the beast went slowly backward. And the clock struck nine. The man tried to slide off, then, but from
all sides of his strange animal great arms came reaching up and held him
fast. And in the next ray of moonlight that broke the dark clouds, he
saw that he was mounted on a monster crab! One by one, the lights went out, in the castle windows. The clock struck
ten. Backward went the crab. Eleven! Still the crab went backward. The
clock struck twelve! Then the great doors shut with a clang, and the
castle of fortune was closed for ever to the lazy man. What became of him and his crab no one knows to this day, and no one
cares. But the industrious man was received by the Fairy of Fortune, and
made happy in the castle as long as he wanted to stay. And ever
afterward she was his friend, helping him not only to happiness for
himself, but also showing him how to help others, wherever he went. DAVID AND GOLIATH


A long time ago, there was a boy named David, who lived in a country in
the Far East. He was good to look upon, for he had fair hair and a ruddy
skin; and he was very strong and brave and modest. He was shepherd-boy
for his father, and all day--often all night--he was out in the fields,
far from home, watching over the sheep. He had to guard them from wild
animals, and lead them to the right pastures, and care for them. By and by, war broke out between the people of David's country and a
people that lived near at hand; these men were called Philistines, and
the people of David's country were named Israelites. All the strong men
of Israel went up to the battle, to fight for their king. David's three
older brothers went, but he was only a boy, so he was left behind to
care for the sheep. After the brothers had been gone some time, David's father longed very
much to hear from them, and to know if they were safe; so he sent for
David, from the fields, and said to him, "Take now for thy brothers an
ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp,
where thy brothers are; and carry these ten cheeses to the captain of
their thousand, and see how thy brothers fare, and bring me word again." (An ephah is about three pecks.) David rose early in the morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, and
took the corn and the loaves and the cheeses, as his father had
commanded him, and went to the camp of the Israelites. The camp stood on a mountain on the one side, and the Philistines stood
on a mountain on the other side; and there was a valley between. David
came to the place where the Israelites were, just as the host was going
forth to the fight, shouting for the battle. So he left his gifts in the
hands of the keeper of the baggage, and ran into the army, amongst the
soldiers, to find his brothers. When he found them, he saluted them and
began to talk with them. But while he was asking them the questions his father had commanded,
there arose a great shouting and tumult among the Israelites, and men
came running back from the front line of battle; everything became
confusion. David looked to see what the trouble was, and he saw a
strange sight: down the slope of the opposite mountain came striding a
Philistine warrior, calling out something in a taunting voice; he was a
gigantic man, the largest David had ever seen, and he was covered with
armour, that shone in the sun: he had a helmet of brass upon his head,
and he was armed with a coat of mail, and he had greaves of brass upon
his legs, and a target of brass between his shoulders; his spear was so
tremendous that the staff of it was like a weaver's beam, and his shield
so great that a man went before him, to carry it. "Who is that?" asked David. "It is Goliath, of Gath, champion of the Philistines," said the soldiers
about. "Every day, for forty days, he has come forth, so, and challenged
us to send a man against him, in single combat; and since no one dares
to go out against him alone, the armies cannot fight." (That was one of
the laws of warfare in those times.) "What!" said David, "does none dare go out against him?" As he spoke, the giant stood still, on the hillside opposite the host
of Israel, and shouted his challenge, scornfully. He said, "Why are ye
come out to set your battle in array? Am I not a Philistine, and ye
servants of Saul? Choose you a man, and let him come down to me. If he
be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants;
but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our
servants, and serve us. I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a
man, that we may fight together!" When King Saul heard these words, he was dismayed, and all the men of
Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him and were sore afraid. David
heard them talking among themselves, whispering and murmuring. They were
saying, "Have ye seen this man that is come up? Surely if anyone killeth
him that man will the king make rich; perhaps he will give him his
daughter in marriage, and make his family free in Israel!" David heard this, and he asked the men if it were so. It was surely so,
they said. "But," said David, "who is this Philistine, that he should defy the
armies of the living God?" And he was stirred with anger. Very soon, some of the officers told the king about the youth who was
asking so many questions, and who said that it was shame upon Israel
that a mere Philistine should defy the armies of the living God. Immediately Saul sent for him. When David came before Saul, he said to
the king, "Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy servant will go
and fight with this Philistine." But Saul looked at David, and said, "Thou art not able to go against
this Philistine, to fight with him, for thou art but a youth, and he has
been a man of war from his youth." Then David said to Saul, "Once I was keeping my father's sheep, and
there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock; and I
went out after the lion, and struck him; and delivered the lamb out of
his mouth, and when he arose against me, I caught him by the beard, and
struck him, and slew him! Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear;
and this Philistine shall be as one of them, for he hath defied the
armies of the living God. The Lord, who delivered me out of the paw of
the lion and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the
hand of this Philistine." "Go," said Saul, "and the Lord be with thee!" And he armed David with his own armour,--he put a helmet of brass upon
his head, and armed him with a coat of mail. But when David girded his
sword upon his armour, and tried to walk, he said to Saul, "I cannot go
with these, for I am not used to them." And he put them off. Then he took his staff in his hand and went and chose five smooth stones
out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he had; and his
sling was in his hand; and he went out and drew near to the Philistine. And the Philistine came on and drew near to David; and the man that bore
his shield went before him. And when the Philistine looked about and saw
David, he disdained him, for David was but a boy, and ruddy, and of a
fair countenance. And he said to David, "Am I a dog, that thou comest to
me with a cudgel?" And with curses he cried out again, "Come to me, and
I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of
the field." But David looked at him, and answered, "Thou comest to me with a sword,
and with a spear, and with a shield; but I come to thee in the name of
the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast
defied. This day will the Lord deliver thee into my hand, and I will
smite thee, and take thy head from thee, and I will give the carcasses
of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and
to the wild beasts of the earth, that all the earth may know that there
is a God in Israel! And all this assembly shall know that the Lord
saveth not with sword and spear; for the battle is the Lord's, and he
will give you into our hands." And then, when the Philistine arose, and came, and drew nigh to meet
David, David made haste and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine. And when he was a little way from him, he put his hand in his bag, and
took from thence a stone, and put it in his sling, and slung it, and
smote the Philistine in the forehead, so that the stone sank into his
forehead; and he fell on his face to the earth. And David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his sword, and
drew it out of its sheath, and slew him with it. Then, when the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled. But the army of Israel pursued them, and victory was with the men of
Israel. And after the battle, David was taken to the king's tent, and made a
captain over many men; and he went no more to his father's house, to
herd the sheep, but became a man, in the king's service. THE SHEPHERD'S SONG


David had many fierce battles to fight for King Saul against the enemies
of Israel, and he won them all. Then, later, he had to fight against the
king's own soldiers, to save himself, for King Saul grew wickedly
jealous of David's fame as a soldier, and tried to kill him. Twice, when
David had a chance to kill the king, he forbore to harm him; but even
then, Saul continued trying to take his life, and David was kept away
from his home as if he were an enemy. But when King Saul died, the people chose David for their king, because
there was no one so brave, so wise, or so faithful to God. King David
lived a long time, and made his people famous for victory and happiness;
he had many troubles and many wars, but he always trusted that God would
help him, and he never deserted his own people in any hard place. After a battle, or when it was a holiday, or when he was very thankful
for something, King David used to make songs, and sing them before the
people. Some of these songs were so beautiful that they have never been
forgotten. After all these hundreds and hundred of years, we sing them
still; we call them Psalms. Often, after David had made a song, his chief musician would sing with
him, as the people gathered to worship God. Sometimes the singers were
divided into two great choruses, and went to the service in two
processions; then one chorus would sing a verse of David's song, and the
other procession would answer with the next, and then both would sing
together; it was very beautiful to hear. Even now, we sometimes do that
with the songs of David in our churches. One of his Psalms that everybody loves is a song that David made when he
remembered the days before he came to Saul's camp. He remembered the
days and nights he used to spend in the fields with the sheep, when he
was just a shepherd-boy; and he thought to himself that God had taken
care of him just as carefully as he himself used to care for the little
lambs. It is a beautiful song; I wish we knew the music that David made
for it, but we only know his words. I will tell it to you now, and then
you may learn it, to say for yourselves. The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; he leadeth me
     beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul; he leadeth me in the paths of
     righteousness for his name's sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
     death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod
     and thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine
     enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth
     over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
     life; and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.=




THE HIDDEN SERVANTS


This is a legend about a hermit who lived long ago. He lived high up on
the mountainside in a tiny cave; his food was roots and acorns, a bit of
bread given by a peasant, or a cheese brought by a woman who wanted his
prayers; his work was praying, and thinking about God. For forty years
he lived so, preaching to the people, praying for them, comforting them
in trouble, and, most of all, worshipping in his heart. There was just
one thing he cared about: it was to make his soul so pure and perfect
that it could be one of the stones in God's great Temple of Heaven. One day, after the forty years, he had a great longing to know how far
along he had got with his work,--how it looked to the Heavenly Father. And he prayed that he might be shown a man--

     "Whose soul in the heavenly grace had grown
      To the selfsame measure as his own;
      Whose treasure on the celestial shore
      Could neither be less than his nor more." As he looked up from his prayer, a white-robed angel stood in the path
before him. The hermit bowed before the messenger with great gladness,
for he knew that his wish was answered. "Go to the nearest town," the
angel said, "and there, in the public square, you will find a mountebank
(a clown) making the people laugh for money. He is the man you seek; his
soul has grown to the selfsame stature as your own; his treasure on the
celestial shore is neither less than yours nor more." When the angel had faded from sight, the hermit bowed his head again,
but this time with great sorrow and fear. Had his forty years of prayer
been a terrible mistake, and was his soul indeed like a clown, fooling
in the market-place? He knew not what to think. Almost he hoped he
should not find the man, and could believe that he had dreamed the angel
vision. But when he came, after a long, tiring walk to the village, and
the square, alas! there was the clown, doing his silly tricks for the
crowd. The hermit stood and looked at him with terror and sadness, for he felt
that he was looking at his own soul. The face he saw was thin and tired,
and though it kept a smile or a grin for the people, it seemed very sad
to the hermit. Soon the man felt the hermit's eyes; he could not go on
with his tricks. And when he had stopped and the crowd had left, the
hermit went and drew the man aside to a place where they could rest; for
he wanted more than anything else on earth to know what the man's soul
was like, because what it was, his was. So, after a little, he asked the clown, very gently, what his life was,
what it had been. And the clown answered, very sadly, that it was just
as it looked,--a life of foolish tricks, for that was the only way of
earning his bread that he knew. "But have you never been anything different?" asked the hermit,
painfully. The clown's head sank in his hands. "Yes, holy father," he said, "I have
been something else. I was a thief! I once belonged to the most wicked
band of mountain robbers that ever tormented the land, and I was as
wicked as the worst." Alas! The hermit felt that his heart was breaking. Was this how he
looked to the Heavenly Father--like a thief, a cruel mountain robber? He
could hardly speak, and the tears streamed from his old eyes, but he
gathered strength to ask one more question. "I beg you," he said, "if
you have ever done a single good deed in your life, remember it now, and
tell it to me"; for he thought that even one good deed would save him
from utter despair. "Yes, one," the clown said, "but it was so small, it is not worth
telling; my life has been worthless." "Tell me that one!" pleaded the hermit. "Once," said the man, "our band broke into a convent garden and stole
away one of the nuns, to sell as a slave or to keep for a ransom. We
dragged her with us over the rough, long way to our mountain camp, and
set a guard over her for the night. The poor thing prayed to us so
piteously to let her go! And as she begged, she looked from one hard
face to another, with trusting, imploring eyes, as if she could not
believe men could be really bad. Father, when her eyes met mine
something pierced my heart! Pity and shame leaped up, for the first
time, within me. But I made my face as hard and cruel as the rest, and
she turned away, hopeless. "When all was dark and still, I stole like a cat to where she lay bound. I put my hand on her wrist and whispered, 'Trust me, and I will take you
safely home.' I cut her bonds with my knife, and she looked at me to
show that she trusted. Father, by terrible ways that I knew, hidden from
the others, I took her safe to the convent gate. She knocked; they
opened; and she slipped inside. And, as she left me, she turned and
said, 'God will remember.' "That was all. I could not go back to the old bad life, and I had never
learned an honest way to earn my bread. So I became a clown, and must be
a clown until I die." "No! no! my son," cried the hermit, and now his tears were tears of joy. "God has remembered; your soul is in his sight even as mine, who have
prayed and preached for forty years. Your treasure waits for you on the
heavenly shore just as mine does." "As _yours_? Father, you mock me!" said the clown. But when the hermit told him the story of his prayer and the angel's
answer, the poor clown was transfigured with joy, for he knew that his
sins were forgiven. And when the hermit went home to his mountain, the
clown went with him. He, too, became a hermit, and spent his time in
praise and prayer. Together they lived, and worked, and helped the poor. And when, after
two years, the man who had been a clown died, the hermit felt that he
had lost a brother more holy than himself. For ten years more the hermit lived in his mountain hut, thinking always
of God, fasting and praying, and doing no least thing that was wrong. Then, one day, the wish once more came, to know how his work was
growing, and once more he prayed that he might see a being--

     "Whose soul in the heavenly grace had grown
      To the selfsame measure as his own;
      Whose treasure on the celestial shore
      Could neither be less than his nor more." Once more his prayer was answered. The angel came to him, and told him
to go to a certain village on the other side of the mountain, and to a
small farm in it, where two women lived. In them he should find two
souls like his own, in God's sight. When the hermit came to the door of the little farm, the two women who
lived there were overjoyed to see him, for everyone loved and honoured
his name. They put a chair for him on the cool porch, and brought food
and drink. But the hermit was too eager to wait. He longed greatly to
know what the souls of the two women were like, and from their looks he
could see only that they were gentle and honest. One was old, and the
other of middle age. Presently he asked them about their lives. They told him the little
there was to tell: they had worked hard always, in the fields with their
husbands, or in the house; they had many children; they had seen hard
times,--sickness, sorrow; but they had never despaired. "But what of your good deeds," the hermit asked,--"what have you done
for God?" "Very little," they said, sadly, for they were too poor to give much. To
be sure, twice every year, when they killed a sheep for food, they gave
half to their poorer neighbours. "That is very good, very faithful," the hermit said. "And is there any
other good deed you have done?" "Nothing," said the older woman, "unless, unless--it might be called a
good deed----" She looked at the younger woman, who smiled back at her. "What?" said the hermit. Still the woman hesitated; but at last she said, timidly, "It is not
much to tell, father, only this, that it is twenty years since my
sister-in-law and I came to live together in the house; we have brought
up our families here; and in all the twenty years there has never been a
cross word between us, or a look that was less than kind." The hermit bent his head before the two women, and gave thanks in his
heart. "If my soul is as these," he said, "I am blessed indeed." And suddenly a great light came into the hermit's mind, and he saw how
many ways there are of serving God. Some serve him in churches and in
hermits' cells, by praise and prayer; some poor souls who have been very
wicked turn from their wickedness with sorrow, and serve him with
repentance; some live faithfully and gently in humble homes, working,
bringing up children, keeping kind and cheerful; some bear pain
patiently, for His sake. Endless, endless ways there are, that only the
Heavenly Father sees. And so, as the hermit climbed the mountain again, he thought,--

     "As he saw the star-like glow
      Of light, in the cottage windows far,
      How many God's hidden servants are!" LITTLE GOTTLIEB


Across the North Sea, in a country called Germany, lived a little boy
named Gottlieb. His father had died when he was but a baby, and although
from early morning till late at night his mother sat plying her needle,
she found it difficult indeed to provide food and clothing and shelter
for her little boy and herself. Gottlieb was not old enough to work, but he would often sit on a small
stool at his mother's feet and dream about the wonderful things he would
do for his dear mother when he grew to be a man, and she was comforted
as she looked upon her boy, and the thought that she was working for him
often gave strength to her tired fingers. But one night Gottlieb saw that his mother was more than usually
troubled. Every now and then she would sigh, and a tear would trickle
down her cheek. The little boy had grown quick to read these signs of
distress, and he thought, "Christmas will be here soon, and dear mother
is thinking of what a sad time it will be." What would Gottlieb have given to be able to comfort his mother! He
could only sit and brood, while his young heart swelled and a lump rose
in his throat at the thought that he could do nothing. Presently, however, a happy fancy came to him. Was not the Christ Child
born on Christmas Day, and did not He send good gifts to men on His
birthday? But then came the thought, "He will never find us. Our home is
so mean and small." It seemed foolish to hope, but a boy is not long
cast down, and as Gottlieb sat dreaming, a happy inspiration came to
him. Stealing softly from the room he took paper and pen, for he had
learnt to write, and spelt out, word after word, a letter which he
addressed to the Christ Child. You may be sure that the postman was puzzled what to do with this letter
when he sorted it out of the heap in the letter-box. Perhaps the
Burgomaster would know the right thing to do? So the postman took the
letter to the great burly man who lived in the big house and wore a gold
chain round his neck. The Burgomaster opened the envelope, and as he
read the letter written in the trembling hand of a child, tears came
into his eyes. But he spoke gruffly enough to the postman, "This must
be a foolish boy; a small one, I have no doubt." Soon Christmas morning dawned, and Gottlieb woke very early. But others
were up before him, for, to his surprise, he saw a strange gentleman
with his mother. His wondering eyes soon perceived other unusual
objects, for the hearth was piled with wood, and the table was loaded
with food and dainties such as he had never even imagined. Gottlieb entered the room just as his mother threw herself at the
stranger's feet to bless him for his generous goodness to the widow and
orphan. "Nay, give me no thanks, worthy dame," said the visitor. "Rather
be grateful to your little son, and to the good Lord to whom he wrote
for aid." Then he turned to Gottlieb with a smile, "You see that although you
wrote to the Christ Child, your prayer for aid came only to the
Burgomaster. The gifts you asked for are here, but they come from my
hand." But Gottlieb answered him humbly, "Nay, sir, the Christ Child
sent them, for He put the thought in your heart." HOW THE FIR TREE BECAME THE CHRISTMAS TREE


When you stand round the Christmas tree and look longingly at the toys
hanging from the prickly branches, it does not occur to you to ask why
it is always this particular tree that is so honoured at Christmas. The
dark green Fir looks so majestic when laden with bright toys and lit up
by Christmas candles, that perhaps it is not easy to believe that it is
the most modest of trees. But so it is, and because of its humility it
was chosen to bear Christmas gifts to the children. This is the story:

When the Christ Child was born, all people, animals, trees, and other
plants felt that a great happiness had come into the world. And truly,
the Heavenly Father had sent with the Holy Babe His blessings of Peace
and Goodwill to all.