They were more respectful, however, to the
young man who had smashed the window, than to the miscreant who
had had his window smashed. There was an air of refined mystery
about Evan MacIan, which did not exist in the irate little
shopkeeper, an air of refined mystery which appealed to the
policemen, for policemen, like most other English types, are at
once snobs and poets. MacIan might possibly be a gentleman, they
felt; the editor manifestly was not. And the editor's fine
rational republican appeals to his respect for law, and his
ardour to be tried by his fellow citizens, seemed to the police
quite as much gibberish as Evan's mysticism could have done. The
police were not used to hearing principles, even the principles
of their own existence. The police magistrate, before whom they were hurried and tried,
was a Mr. Cumberland Vane, a cheerful, middle-aged gentleman,
honourably celebrated for the lightness of his sentences and the
lightness of his conversation. He occasionally worked himself up
into a sort of theoretic rage about certain particular offenders,
such as the men who took pokers to their wives, talked in a
loose, sentimental way about the desirability of flogging them,
and was hopelessly bewildered by the fact that the wives seemed
even more angry with him than with their husbands. He was a tall,
spruce man, with a twist of black moustache and incomparable
morning dress. He looked like a gentleman, and yet, somehow, like
a stage gentleman. He had often treated serious crimes against mere order or
property with a humane flippancy. Hence, about the mere breaking
of an editor's window, he was almost uproarious. "Come, Mr. MacIan, come," he said, leaning back in his chair, "do
you generally enter you friends' houses by walking through the
glass?" (Laughter.) "He is not my friend," said Evan, with the stolidity of a dull
child. "Not your friend, eh?" said the magistrate, sparkling. "Is he
your brother-in-law?" (Loud and prolonged laughter.) "He is my enemy," said Evan, simply; "he is the enemy of God." Mr. Vane shifted sharply in his seat, dropping the eye-glass out
of his eye in a momentary and not unmanly embarrassment. "You mustn't talk like that here," he said, roughly, and in a
kind of hurry, "that has nothing to do with us." Evan opened his great, blue eyes; "God," he began. "Be quiet," said the magistrate, angrily, "it is most undesirable
that things of that sort should be spoken about--a--in public,
and in an ordinary Court of Justice. Religion is--a--too personal
a matter to be mentioned in such a place." "Is it?" answered the Highlander, "then what did those policemen
swear by just now?" "That is no parallel," answered Vane, rather irritably; "of
course there is a form of oath--to be taken reverently--
reverently, and there's an end of it. But to talk in a public
place about one's most sacred and private sentiments--well, I
call it bad taste. (Slight applause.) I call it irreverent. I call it irreverent, and I'm not specially orthodox either." "I see you are not," said Evan, "but I am." "We are wondering from the point," said the police magistrate,
pulling himself together. "May I ask why you smashed this worthy citizen's window?" Evan turned a little pale at the mere memory, but he answered
with the same cold and deadly literalism that he showed
throughout. "Because he blasphemed Our Lady." "I tell you once and for all," cried Mr. Cumberland Vane, rapping
his knuckles angrily on the table, "I tell you, once and for all,
my man, that I will not have you turning on any religious rant or
cant here. Don't imagine that it will impress me. The most
religious people are not those who talk about it. (Applause.) You answer the questions and do nothing else." "I did nothing else," said Evan, with a slight smile. "Eh," cried Vane, glaring through his eye-glass. "You asked me why I broke his window," said MacIan, with a face
of wood. "I answered, 'Because he blasphemed Our Lady.' I had
no other reason. So I have no other answer." Vane continued to
gaze at him with a sternness not habitual to him. "You are not going the right way to work, Sir," he said, with
severity. "You are not going the right way to work to--a--have
your case treated with special consideration. If you had simply
expressed regret for what you had done, I should have been
strongly inclined to dismiss the matter as an outbreak of temper. Even now, if you say that you are sorry I shall only----"

"But I am not in the least sorry," said Evan, "I am very
pleased." "I really believe you are insane," said the stipendiary,
indignantly, for he had really been doing his best as a
good-natured man, to compose the dispute. "What conceivable right
have you to break other people's windows because their opinions
do not agree with yours? This man only gave expression to his
sincere belief." "So did I," said the Highlander. "And who are you?" exploded Vane. "Are your views necessarily the
right ones? Are you necessarily in possession of the truth?" "Yes," said MacIan. The magistrate broke into a contemptuous laugh. "Oh, you want a nurse to look after you," he said. "You must pay
L10." Evan MacIan plunged his hands into his loose grey garment and
drew out a queer looking leather purse. It contained exactly
twelve sovereigns. He paid down the ten, coin by coin, in
silence, and equally silently returned the remaining two to the
receptacle. Then he said, "May I say a word, your worship?" Cumberland Vane seemed half hypnotized with the silence and
automatic movements of the stranger; he made a movement with his
head which might have been either "yes" or "no". "I only wished
to say, your worship," said MacIan, putting back the purse in his
trouser pocket, "that smashing that shop window was, I confess, a
useless and rather irregular business. It may be excused,
however, as a mere preliminary to further proceedings, a sort of
preface. Wherever and whenever I meet that man," and he pointed
to the editor of _The Atheist_, "whether it be outside this door
in ten minutes from now, or twenty years hence in some distant
country, wherever and whenever I meet that man, I will fight him. Do not be afraid. I will not rush at him like a bully, or bear
him down with any brute superiority. I will fight him like a
gentleman; I will fight him as our fathers fought. He shall
choose how, sword or pistol, horse or foot. But if he refuses, I
will write his cowardice on every wall in the world. If he had
said of my mother what he said of the Mother of God, there is not
a club of clean men in Europe that would deny my right to call
him out. If he had said it of my wife, you English would
yourselves have pardoned me for beating him like a dog in the
market place. Your worship, I have no mother; I have no wife. I
have only that which the poor have equally with the rich; which
the lonely have equally with the man of many friends. To me this
whole strange world is homely, because in the heart of it there
is a home; to me this cruel world is kindly, because higher than
the heavens there is something more human than humanity. If a man
must not fight for this, may he fight for anything? I would fight
for my friend, but if I lost my friend, I should still be there. I would fight for my country, but if I lost my country, I should
still exist. But if what that devil dreams were true, I should
not be--I should burst like a bubble and be gone. I could not
live in that imbecile universe. Shall I not fight for my own
existence?" The magistrate recovered his voice and his presence of mind. The
first part of the speech, the bombastic and brutally practical
challenge, stunned him with surprise; but the rest of Evan's
remarks, branching off as they did into theoretic phrases, gave
his vague and very English mind (full of memories of the hedging
and compromise in English public speaking) an indistinct
sensation of relief, as if the man, though mad, were not so
dangerous as he had thought. He went into a sort of weary
laughter. "For Heaven's sake, man," he said, "don't talk so much. Let other
people have a chance (laughter). I trust all that you said about
asking Mr. Turnbull to fight, may be regarded as rubbish. In case
of accidents, however, I must bind you over to keep the peace." "To keep the peace," repeated Evan, "with whom?" "With Mr. Turnbull," said Vane. "Certainly not," answered MacIan. "What has he to do with peace?" "Do you mean to say," began the magistrate, "that you refuse
to..."  The voice of Turnbull himself clove in for the first time. "Might I suggest," he said, "That I, your worship, can settle to
some extent this absurd matter myself. This rather wild gentleman
promises that he will not attack me with any ordinary assault--
and if he does, you may be sure the police shall hear of it. But
he says he will not. He says he will challenge me to a duel; and
I cannot say anything stronger about his mental state than to say
that I think that it is highly probable that he will. (Laughter.) But it takes two to make a duel, your worship (renewed laughter). I do not in the least mind being described on every wall in the
world as the coward who would not fight a man in Fleet Street,
about whether the Virgin Mary had a parallel in Mesopotamian
mythology. No, your worship. You need not trouble to bind him
over to keep the peace. I bind myself over to keep the peace,
and you may rest quite satisfied that there will be no duel with
me in it." Mr. Cumberland Vane rolled about, laughing in a sort of relief. "You're like a breath of April, sir," he cried. "You're ozone
after that fellow. You're perfectly right. Perhaps I have taken
the thing too seriously. I should love to see him sending you
challenges and to see you smiling. Well, well." Evan went out of the Court of Justice free, but strangely shaken,
like a sick man. Any punishment of suppression he would have felt
as natural; but the sudden juncture between the laughter of his
judge and the laughter of the man he had wronged, made him feel
suddenly small, or at least, defeated. It was really true that
the whole modern world regarded his world as a bubble. No cruelty
could have shown it, but their kindness showed it with a ghastly
clearness. As he was brooding, he suddenly became conscious of a
small, stern figure, fronting him in silence. Its eyes were grey
and awful, and its beard red. It was Turnbull. "Well, sir," said the editor of _The Atheist_, "where is the
fight to be? Name the field, sir." Evan stood thunderstruck. He stammered out something, he knew not
what; he only guessed it by the answer of the other. "Do I want to fight? Do I want to fight?" cried the furious
Free-thinker. "Why, you moonstruck scarecrow of superstition, do
you think your dirty saints are the only people who can die? Haven't you hung atheists, and burned them, and boiled them, and
did they ever deny their faith? Do you think we don't want to
fight? Night and day I have prayed--I have longed--for an atheist
revolution--I have longed to see your blood and ours on the
streets. Let it be yours or mine?" "But you said..." began MacIan. "I know," said Turnbull scornfully. "And what did you say? You
damned fool, you said things that might have got us locked up for
a year, and shadowed by the coppers for half a decade. If you
wanted to fight, why did you tell that ass you wanted to? I got
you out, to fight if you want to. Now, fight if you dare." "I swear to you, then," said MacIan, after a pause. "I swear to
you that nothing shall come between us. I swear to you that
nothing shall be in my heart or in my head till our swords clash
together. I swear it by the God you have denied, by the Blessed
Lady you have blasphemed; I swear it by the seven swords in her
heart. I swear it by the Holy Island where my fathers are, by the
honour of my mother, by the secret of my people, and by the
chalice of the Blood of God." The atheist drew up his head. "And I," he said, "give my word." III. SOME OLD CURIOSITIES

The evening sky, a dome of solid gold, unflaked even by a single
sunset cloud, steeped the meanest sights of London in a strange
and mellow light. It made a little greasy street of St. Martin's
Lane look as if it were paved with gold. It made the pawnbroker's
half-way down it shine as if it were really that Mountain of
Piety that the French poetic instinct has named it; it made the
mean pseudo-French bookshop, next but one to it, a shop packed
with dreary indecency, show for a moment a kind of Parisian
colour. And the shop that stood between the pawnshop and the shop
of dreary indecency, showed with quite a blaze of old world
beauty, for it was, by accident, a shop not unbeautiful in
itself. The front window had a glimmer of bronze and blue steel,
lit, as by a few stars, by the sparks of what were alleged to be
jewels; for it was in brief, a shop of bric-a-brac and old
curiosities. A row of half-burnished seventeenth-century swords
ran like an ornate railing along the front of the window; behind
was a darker glimmer of old oak and old armour; and higher up
hung the most extraordinary looking South Sea tools or utensils,
whether designed for killing enemies or merely for cooking them,
no mere white man could possibly conjecture. But the romance of
the eye, which really on this rich evening, clung about the shop,
had its main source in the accident of two doors standing open,
the front door that opened on the street and a back door that
opened on an odd green square of garden, that the sun turned to a
square of gold. There is nothing more beautiful than thus to look
as it were through the archway of a house; as if the open sky
were an interior chamber, and the sun a secret lamp of the place. I have suggested that the sunset light made everything lovely. To
say that it made the keeper of the curiosity shop lovely would be
a tribute to it perhaps too extreme. It would easily have made
him beautiful if he had been merely squalid; if he had been a Jew
of the Fagin type. But he was a Jew of another and much less
admirable type; a Jew with a very well-sounding name. For though
there are no hard tests for separating the tares and the wheat of
any people, one rude but efficient guide is that the nice Jew is
called Moses Solomon, and the nasty Jew is called Thornton Percy. The keeper of the curiosity shop was of the Thornton Percy branch
of the chosen people; he belonged to those Lost Ten Tribes whose
industrious object is to lose themselves. He was a man still
young, but already corpulent, with sleek dark hair, heavy
handsome clothes, and a full, fat, permanent smile, which looked
at the first glance kindly, and at the second cowardly. The name
over his shop was Henry Gordon, but two Scotchmen who were in his
shop that evening could come upon no trace of a Scotch accent. These two Scotchmen in this shop were careful purchasers, but
free-handed payers. One of them who seemed to be the principal
and the authority (whom, indeed, Mr. Henry Gordon fancied he had
seen somewhere before), was a small, sturdy fellow, with fine
grey eyes, a square red tie and a square red beard, that he
carried aggressively forward as if he defied anyone to pull it. The other kept so much in the background in comparison that he
looked almost ghostly in his grey cloak or plaid, a tall, sallow,
silent young man. The two Scotchmen were interested in seventeenth-century swords. They were fastidious about them. They had a whole armoury of
these weapons brought out and rolled clattering about the
counter, until they found two of precisely the same length. Presumably they desired the exact symmetry for some decorative
trophy. Even then they felt the points, poised the swords for
balance and bent them in a circle to see that they sprang
straight again; which, for decorative purposes, seems carrying
realism rather far. "These will do," said the strange person with the red beard. "And perhaps I had better pay for them at once. And as you are
the challenger, Mr. MacIan, perhaps you had better explain the
situation." The tall Scotchman in grey took a step forward and spoke in a
voice quite clear and bold, and yet somehow lifeless, like a man
going through an ancient formality. "The fact is, Mr. Gordon, we have to place our honour in your
hands. Words have passed between Mr. Turnbull and myself on a
grave and invaluable matter, which can only be atoned for by
fighting. Unfortunately, as the police are in some sense pursuing
us, we are hurried, and must fight now and without seconds. But
if you will be so kind as to take us into your little garden and
see far play, we shall feel how----"

The shopman recovered himself from a stunning surprise and burst
out:

"Gentlemen, are you drunk? A duel! A duel in my garden. Go
home, gentlemen, go home. Why, what did you quarrel about?" "We quarrelled," said Evan, in the same dead voice, "about
religion." The fat shopkeeper rolled about in his chair with
enjoyment. "Well, this is a funny game," he said. "So you want to commit
murder on behalf of religion. Well, well my religion is a little
respect for humanity, and----"

"Excuse me," cut in Turnbull, suddenly and fiercely, pointing
towards the pawnbroker's next door. "Don't you own that shop?" "Why--er--yes," said Gordon. "And don't you own that shop?" repeated the secularist, pointing
backward to the pornographic bookseller. "What if I do?" "Why, then," cried Turnbull, with grating contempt. "I will leave
the religion of humanity confidently in your hands; but I am
sorry I troubled you about such a thing as honour. Look here, my
man. I do believe in humanity. I do believe in liberty. My father
died for it under the swords of the Yeomanry. I am going to die
for it, if need be, under that sword on your counter. But if
there is one sight that makes me doubt it it is your foul fat
face. It is hard to believe you were not meant to be ruled like a
dog or killed like a cockroach. Don't try your slave's philosophy
on me. We are going to fight, and we are going to fight in your
garden, with your swords. Be still! Raise your voice above a
whisper, and I run you through the body." Turnbull put the bright point of the sword against the gay
waistcoat of the dealer, who stood choking with rage and fear,
and an astonishment so crushing as to be greater than either. "MacIan," said Turnbull, falling almost into the familiar tone of
a business partner, "MacIan, tie up this fellow and put a gag in
his mouth. Be still, I say, or I kill you where you stand." The man was too frightened to scream, but he struggled wildly,
while Evan MacIan, whose long, lean hands were unusually
powerful, tightened some old curtain cords round him, strapped a
rope gag in his mouth and rolled him on his back on the floor. "There's nothing very strong here," said Evan, looking about him. "I'm afraid he'll work through that gag in half an hour or so." "Yes," said Turnbull, "but one of us will be killed by that
time." "Well, let's hope so," said the Highlander, glancing doubtfully
at the squirming thing on the floor. "And now," said Turnbull, twirling his fiery moustache and
fingering his sword, "let us go into the garden. What an
exquisite summer evening!" MacIan said nothing, but lifting his sword from the counter went
out into the sun. The brilliant light ran along the blades, filling the channels of
them with white fire; the combatants stuck their swords in the
turf and took off their hats, coats, waistcoats, and boots. Evan
said a short Latin prayer to himself, during which Turnbull made
something of a parade of lighting a cigarette which he flung away
the instant after, when he saw MacIan apparently standing ready. Yet MacIan was not exactly ready. He stood staring like a man
stricken with a trance. "What are you staring at?" asked Turnbull. "Do you see the
bobbies?" "I see Jerusalem," said Evan, "all covered with the shields and
standards of the Saracens." "Jerusalem!" said Turnbull, laughing. "Well, we've taken the only
inhabitant into captivity." And he picked up his sword and made it whistle like a boy's wand. "I beg your pardon," said MacIan, dryly. "Let us begin." MacIan made a military salute with his weapon, which Turnbull
copied or parodied with an impatient contempt; and in the
stillness of the garden the swords came together with a clear
sound like a bell. The instant the blades touched, each felt them
tingle to their very points with a personal vitality, as if they
were two naked nerves of steel. Evan had worn throughout an air
of apathy, which might have been the stale apathy of one who
wants nothing. But it was indeed the more dreadful apathy of one
who wants something and will care for nothing else. And this was
seen suddenly; for the instant Evan engaged he disengaged and
lunged with an infernal violence. His opponent with a desperate
promptitude parried and riposted; the parry only just succeeded,
the riposte failed. Something big and unbearable seemed to have
broken finally out of Evan in that first murderous lunge, leaving
him lighter and cooler and quicker upon his feet. He fell to
again, fiercely still, but now with a fierce caution. The next
moment Turnbull lunged; MacIan seemed to catch the point and
throw it away from him, and was thrusting back like a
thunderbolt, when a sound paralysed him; another sound beside
their ringing weapons. Turnbull, perhaps from an equal
astonishment, perhaps from chivalry, stopped also and forebore to
send his sword through his exposed enemy. "What's that?" asked Evan, hoarsely. A heavy scraping sound, as of a trunk being dragged along a
littered floor, came from the dark shop behind them. "The old Jew has broken one of his strings, and he's crawling
about," said Turnbull. "Be quick! We must finish before he gets
his gag out." "Yes, yes, quick! On guard!" cried the Highlander. The blades
crossed again with the same sound like song, and the men went to
work again with the same white and watchful faces. Evan, in his
impatience, went back a little to his wildness. He made
windmills, as the French duellists say, and though he was
probably a shade the better fencer of the two, he found the
other's point pass his face twice so close as almost to graze his
cheek. The second time he realized the actual possibility of
defeat and pulled himself together under a shock of the sanity of
anger. He narrowed, and, so to speak, tightened his operations:
he fenced (as the swordsman's boast goes), in a wedding ring; he
turned Turnbull's thrusts with a maddening and almost mechanical
click, like that of a machine. Whenever Turnbull's sword sought
to go over that other mere white streak it seemed to be caught in
a complex network of steel. He turned one thrust, turned another,
turned another. Then suddenly he went forward at the lunge with
his whole living weight. Turnbull leaped back, but Evan lunged
and lunged and lunged again like a devilish piston rod or
battering ram. And high above all the sound of the struggle there
broke into the silent evening a bellowing human voice, nasal,
raucous, at the highest pitch of pain. "Help! Help! Police! Murder! Murder!" The gag was broken; and the tongue of terror
was loose. "Keep on!" gasped Turnbull. "One may be killed before they come." The voice of the screaming shopkeeper was loud enough to drown
not only the noise of the swords but all other noises around it,
but even through its rending din there seemed to be some other
stir or scurry. And Evan, in the very act of thrusting at
Turnbull, saw something in his eyes that made him drop his sword. The atheist, with his grey eyes at their widest and wildest, was
staring straight over his shoulder at the little archway of shop
that opened on the street beyond. And he saw the archway blocked
and blackened with strange figures. "We must bolt, MacIan," he said abruptly. "And there isn't a
damned second to lose either. Do as I do." With a bound he was beside the little cluster of his clothes and
boots that lay on the lawn; he snatched them up, without waiting
to put any of them on; and tucking his sword under his other arm,
went wildly at the wall at the bottom of the garden and swung
himself over it. Three seconds after he had alighted in his socks
on the other side, MacIan alighted beside him, also in his socks
and also carrying clothes and sword in a desperate bundle. They were in a by-street, very lean and lonely itself, but so
close to a crowded thoroughfare that they could see the vague
masses of vehicles going by, and could even see an individual
hansom cab passing the corner at the instant. Turnbull put his
fingers to his mouth like a gutter-snipe and whistled twice. Even
as he did so he could hear the loud voices of the neighbours and
the police coming down the garden. The hansom swung sharply and came tearing down the little lane at
his call. When the cabman saw his fares, however, two wild-haired
men in their shirts and socks with naked swords under their arms,
he not unnaturally brought his readiness to a rigid stop and
stared suspiciously. "You talk to him a minute," whispered Turnbull, and stepped back
into the shadow of the wall. "We want you," said MacIan to the cabman, with a superb Scotch
drawl of indifference and assurance, "to drive us to St. Pancras
Station--verra quick." "Very sorry, sir," said the cabman, "but I'd like to know it was
all right. Might I arst where you come from, sir?" A second after he spoke MacIan heard a heavy voice on the other
side of the wall, saying: "I suppose I'd better get over and look
for them. Give me a back." "Cabby," said MacIan, again assuming the most deliberate and
lingering lowland Scotch intonation, "if ye're really verra
anxious to ken whar a' come fra', I'll tell ye as a verra great
secret. A' come from Scotland. And a'm gaein' to St. Pancras
Station. Open the doors, cabby." The cabman stared, but laughed. The heavy voice behind the wall
said: "Now then, a better back this time, Mr. Price." And from
the shadow of the wall Turnbull crept out. He had struggled
wildly into his coat (leaving his waistcoat on the pavement), and
he was with a fierce pale face climbing up the cab behind the
cabman. MacIan had no glimmering notion of what he was up to, but
an instinct of discipline, inherited from a hundred men of war,
made him stick to his own part and trust the other man's. "Open the doors, cabby," he repeated, with something of the
obstinate solemnity of a drunkard, "open the doors. Did ye no
hear me say St. Pancras Station?" The top of a policeman's helmet appeared above the garden wall. The cabman did not see it, but he was still suspicious and began:

"Very sorry, sir, but..." and with that the catlike Turnbull tore
him out of his seat and hurled him into the street below, where
he lay suddenly stunned. "Give me his hat," said Turnbull in a silver voice, that the
other obeyed like a bugle. "And get inside with the swords." And just as the red and raging face of a policeman appeared above
the wall, Turnbull struck the horse with a terrible cut of the
whip and the two went whirling away like a boomerang. They had spun through seven streets and three or four squares
before anything further happened. Then, in the neighbourhood of
Maida Vale, the driver opened the trap and talked through it in a
manner not wholly common in conversations through that aperture. "Mr. MacIan," he said shortly and civilly. "Mr. Turnbull," replied his motionless fare. "Under circumstances such as those in which we were both recently
placed there was no time for anything but very abrupt action. I
trust therefore that you have no cause to complain of me if I
have deferred until this moment a consultation with you on our
present position or future action. Our present position, Mr.
MacIan, I imagine that I am under no special necessity of
describing. We have broken the law and we are fleeing from its
officers. Our future action is a thing about which I myself
entertain sufficiently strong views; but I have no right to
assume or to anticipate yours, though I may have formed a decided
conception of your character and a decided notion of what they
will probably be. Still, by every principle of intellectual
justice, I am bound to ask you now and seriously whether you wish
to continue our interrupted relations." MacIan leant his white and rather weary face back upon the
cushions in order to speak up through the open door. "Mr. Turnbull," he said, "I have nothing to add to what I have
said before. It is strongly borne in upon me that you and I, the
sole occupants of this runaway cab, are at this moment the two
most important people in London, possibly in Europe. I have been
looking at all the streets as we went past, I have been looking
at all the shops as we went past, I have been looking at all the
churches as we went past. At first, I felt a little dazed with
the vastness of it all. I could not understand what it all meant. But now I know exactly what it all means. It means us. This whole
civilization is only a dream. You and I are the realities." "Religious symbolism," said Mr. Turnbull, through the trap, "does
not, as you are probably aware, appeal ordinarily to thinkers of
the school to which I belong. But in symbolism as you use it in
this instance, I must, I think, concede a certain truth. We
_must_ fight this thing out somewhere; because, as you truly say,
we have found each other's reality. We _must_ kill each other--or
convert each other. I used to think all Christians were
hypocrites, and I felt quite mildly towards them really. But I
know you are sincere--and my soul is mad against you. In the same
way you used, I suppose, to think that all atheists thought
atheism would leave them free for immorality--and yet in your
heart you tolerated them entirely. Now you _know_ that I am an
honest man, and you are mad against me, as I am against you. Yes,
that's it. You can't be angry with bad men. But a good man in the
wrong--why one thirsts for his blood. Yes, you open for me a
vista of thought." "Don't run into anything," said Evan, immovably. "There's something in that view of yours, too," said Turnbull,
and shut down the trap. They sped on through shining streets that shot by them like
arrows. Mr. Turnbull had evidently a great deal of unused
practical talent which was unrolling itself in this ridiculous
adventure. They had got away with such stunning promptitude that
the police chase had in all probability not even properly begun. But in case it had, the amateur cabman chose his dizzy course
through London with a strange dexterity. He did not do what would
have first occurred to any ordinary outsider desiring to destroy
his tracks. He did not cut into by-ways or twist his way through
mean streets. His amateur common sense told him that it was
precisely the poor street, the side street, that would be likely
to remember and report the passing of a hansom cab, like the
passing of a royal procession. He kept chiefly to the great
roads, so full of hansoms that a wilder pair than they might
easily have passed in the press. In one of the quieter streets
Evan put on his boots. Towards the top of Albany Street the singular cabman again opened
the trap. "Mr. MacIan," he said, "I understand that we have now definitely
settled that in the conventional language honour is not
satisfied. Our action must at least go further than it has gone
under recent interrupted conditions. That, I believe, is
understood." "Perfectly," replied the other with his bootlace in his teeth. "Under those conditions," continued Turnbull, his voice coming
through the hole with a slight note of trepidation very unusual
with him, "I have a suggestion to make, if that can be called a
suggestion, which has probably occurred to you as readily as to
me. Until the actual event comes off we are practically in the
position if not of comrades, at least of business partners. Until
the event comes off, therefore I should suggest that quarrelling
would be inconvenient and rather inartistic; while the ordinary
exchange of politeness between man and man would be not only
elegant but uncommonly practical." "You are perfectly right," answered MacIan, with his melancholy
voice, "in saying that all this has occurred to me. All duellists
should behave like gentlemen to each other. But we, by the
queerness of our position, are something much more than either
duellists or gentlemen. We are, in the oddest and most exact
sense of the term, brothers--in arms." "Mr. MacIan," replied Turnbull, calmly, "no more need be said." And he closed the trap once more. They had reached Finchley Road before he opened it again. Then he said, "Mr. MacIan, may I offer you a cigar. It will be a
touch of realism." "Thank you," answered Evan. "You are very kind." And he began to
smoke in the cab. IV. A DISCUSSION AT DAWN

The duellists had from their own point of view escaped or
conquered the chief powers of the modern world. They had
satisfied the magistrate, they had tied the tradesman neck and
heels, and they had left the police behind. As far as their own
feelings went they had melted into a monstrous sea; they were but
the fare and driver of one of the million hansoms that fill
London streets. But they had forgotten something; they had
forgotten journalism. They had forgotten that there exists in
the modern world, perhaps for the first time in history, a class
of people whose interest is not that things should happen well or
happen badly, should happen successfully or happen
unsuccessfully, should happen to the advantage of this party or
the advantage of that part, but whose interest simply is that
things should happen. It is the one great weakness of journalism as a picture of our
modern existence, that it must be a picture made up entirely of
exceptions. We announce on flaring posters that a man has fallen
off a scaffolding. We do not announce on flaring posters that a
man has not fallen off a scaffolding. Yet this latter fact is
fundamentally more exciting, as indicating that that moving tower
of terror and mystery, a man, is still abroad upon the earth. That the man has not fallen off a scaffolding is really more
sensational; and it is also some thousand times more common. But
journalism cannot reasonably be expected thus to insist upon the
permanent miracles. Busy editors cannot be expected to put on
their posters, "Mr. Wilkinson Still Safe," or "Mr. Jones, of
Worthing, Not Dead Yet." They cannot announce the happiness of
mankind at all. They cannot describe all the forks that are not
stolen, or all the marriages that are not judiciously dissolved. Hence the complete picture they give of life is of necessity
fallacious; they can only represent what is unusual. However
democratic they may be, they are only concerned with the
minority. The incident of the religious fanatic who broke a window on
Ludgate Hill was alone enough to set them up in good copy for the
night. But when the same man was brought before a magistrate and
defied his enemy to mortal combat in the open court, then the
columns would hardly hold the excruciating information, and the
headlines were so large that there was hardly room for any of the
text. The _Daily Telegraph_ headed a column, "A Duel on
Divinity," and there was a correspondence afterwards which lasted
for months, about whether police magistrates ought to mention
religion. The _Daily Mail_ in its dull, sensible way, headed the
events, "Wanted to fight for the Virgin." Mr. James Douglas, in
_The Star_, presuming on his knowledge of philosophical and
theological terms, described the Christian's outbreak under the
title of "Dualist and Duellist." The _Daily News_ inserted a
colourless account of the matter, but was pursued and eaten up
for some weeks, with letters from outlying ministers, headed
"Murder and Mariolatry." But the journalistic temperature was
steadily and consistently heated by all these influences; the
journalists had tasted blood, prospectively, and were in the mood
for more; everything in the matter prepared them for further
outbursts of moral indignation. And when a gasping reporter
rushed in in the last hours of the evening with the announcement
that the two heroes of the Police Court had literally been found
fighting in a London back garden, with a shopkeeper bound and
gagged in the front of the house, the editors and sub-editors
were stricken still as men are by great beatitudes. The next morning, five or six of the great London dailies burst
out simultaneously into great blossoms of eloquent
leader-writing. Towards the end all the leaders tended to be the
same, but they all began differently. The _Daily Telegraph_, for
instance began, "There will be little difference among our
readers or among all truly English and law-abiding men touching
the, etc. etc." The _Daily Mail_ said, "People must learn, in the
modern world, to keep their theological differences to
themselves. The fracas, etc. etc." The _Daily News_ started,
"Nothing could be more inimical to the cause of true religion
than, etc. etc." The _Times_ began with something about Celtic
disturbances of the equilibrium of Empire, and the _Daily
Express_ distinguished itself splendidly by omitting altogether
so controversial a matter and substituting a leader about
goloshes. And the morning after that, the editors and the newspapers were
in such a state, that, as the phrase is, there was no holding
them. Whatever secret and elvish thing it is that broods over
editors and suddenly turns their brains, that thing had seized on
the story of the broken glass and the duel in the garden. It
became monstrous and omnipresent, as do in our time the
unimportant doings of the sect of the Agapemonites, or as did at
an earlier time the dreary dishonesties of the Rhodesian
financiers. Questions were asked about it, and even answered, in
the House of Commons. The Government was solemnly denounced in
the papers for not having done something, nobody knew what, to
prevent the window being broken. An enormous subscription was
started to reimburse Mr. Gordon, the man who had been gagged in
the shop. Mr. MacIan, one of the combatants, became for some
mysterious reason, singly and hugely popular as a comic figure in
the comic papers and on the stage of the music hall. He was
always represented (in defiance of fact), with red whiskers, and
a very red nose, and in full Highland costume. And a song,
consisting of an unimaginable number of verses, in which his name
was rhymed with flat iron, the British Lion, sly 'un, dandelion,
Spion (With Kop in the next line), was sung to crowded houses
every night. The papers developed a devouring thirst for the
capture of the fugitives; and when they had not been caught for
forty-eight hours, they suddenly turned the whole matter into a
detective mystery. Letters under the heading, "Where are They,"
poured in to every paper, with every conceivable kind of
explanation, running them to earth in the Monument, the Twopenny
Tube, Epping Forest, Westminster Abbey, rolled up in carpets at
Shoolbreds, locked up in safes in Chancery Lane. Yes, the papers
were very interesting, and Mr. Turnbull unrolled a whole bundle
of them for the amusement of Mr. MacIan as they sat on a high
common to the north of London, in the coming of the white dawn. The darkness in the east had been broken with a bar of grey; the
bar of grey was split with a sword of silver and morning lifted
itself laboriously over London. From the spot where Turnbull and
MacIan were sitting on one of the barren steeps behind Hampstead,
they could see the whole of London shaping itself vaguely and
largely in the grey and growing light, until the white sun stood
over it and it lay at their feet, the splendid monstrosity that
it is. Its bewildering squares and parallelograms were compact
and perfect as a Chinese puzzle; an enormous hieroglyphic which
man must decipher or die. There fell upon both of them, but upon
Turnbull more than the other, because he know more what the scene
signified, that quite indescribable sense as of a sublime and
passionate and heart-moving futility, which is never evoked by
deserts or dead men or men neglected and barbarous, which can
only be invoked by the sight of the enormous genius of man
applied to anything other than the best. Turnbull, the old
idealistic democrat, had so often reviled the democracy and
reviled them justly for their supineness, their snobbishness,
their evil reverence for idle things. He was right enough; for
our democracy has only one great fault; it is not democratic. And
after denouncing so justly average modern men for so many years
as sophists and as slaves, he looked down from an empty slope in
Hampstead and saw what gods they are. Their achievement seemed
all the more heroic and divine, because it seemed doubtful
whether it was worth doing at all. There seemed to be something
greater than mere accuracy in making such a mistake as London. And what was to be the end of it all? what was to be the ultimate
transformation of this common and incredible London man, this
workman on a tram in Battersea, his clerk on an omnibus in
Cheapside? Turnbull, as he stared drearily, murmured to himself
the words of the old atheistic and revolutionary Swinburne who
had intoxicated his youth:

        "And still we ask if God or man
        Can loosen thee Lazarus;
        Bid thee rise up republican,
        And save thyself and all of us. But no disciple's tongue can say
        If thou can'st take our sins away." Turnbull shivered slightly as if behind the earthly morning he
felt the evening of the world, the sunset of so many hopes. Those
words were from "Songs before Sunrise". But Turnbull's songs at
their best were songs after sunrise, and sunrise had been no such
great thing after all. Turnbull shivered again in the sharp
morning air. MacIan was also gazing with his face towards the
city, but there was that about his blind and mystical stare that
told one, so to speak, that his eyes were turned inwards. When
Turnbull said something to him about London, they seemed to move
as at a summons and come out like two householders coming out
into their doorways. "Yes," he said, with a sort of stupidity. "It's a very big
place." There was a somewhat unmeaning silence, and then MacIan said
again:

"It's a very big place. When I first came into it I was
frightened of it. Frightened exactly as one would be frightened
at the sight of a man forty feet high. I am used to big things
where I come from, big mountains that seem to fill God's
infinity, and the big sea that goes to the end of the world. But
then these things are all shapeless and confused things, not made
in any familiar form. But to see the plain, square, human things
as large as that, houses so large and streets so large, and the
town itself so large, was like having screwed some devil's
magnifying glass into one's eye. It was like seeing a porridge
bowl as big as a house, or a mouse-trap made to catch elephants." "Like the land of the Brobdingnagians," said Turnbull, smiling. "Oh! Where is that?" said MacIan. Turnbull said bitterly, "In a book," and the silence fell
suddenly between them again. They were sitting in a sort of litter on the hillside; all the
things they had hurriedly collected, in various places, for their
flight, were strewn indiscriminately round them. The two swords
with which they had lately sought each other's lives were flung
down on the grass at random, like two idle walking-sticks. Some
provisions they had bought last night, at a low public house, in
case of undefined contingencies, were tossed about like the
materials of an ordinary picnic, here a basket of chocolate, and
there a bottle of wine. And to add to the disorder finally, there
were strewn on top of everything, the most disorderly of modern
things, newspapers, and more newspapers, and yet again
newspapers, the ministers of the modern anarchy. Turnbull picked
up one of them drearily, and took out a pipe. "There's a lot about us," he said. "Do you mind if I light up?" "Why should I mind?" asked MacIan. Turnbull eyed with a certain studious interest, the man who did
not understand any of the verbal courtesies; he lit his pipe and
blew great clouds out of it. "Yes," he resumed. "The matter on which you and I are engaged is
at this moment really the best copy in England. I am a
journalist, and I know. For the first time, perhaps, for many
generations, the English are really more angry about a wrong
thing done in England than they are about a wrong thing done in
France." "It is not a wrong thing," said MacIan. Turnbull laughed. "You seem unable to understand the ordinary use
of the human language. If I did not suspect that you were a
genius, I should certainly know you were a blockhead. I fancy we
had better be getting along and collecting our baggage." And he jumped up and began shoving the luggage into his pockets,
or strapping it on to his back. As he thrust a tin of canned
meat, anyhow, into his bursting side pocket, he said casually:

"I only meant that you and I are the most prominent people in the
English papers." "Well, what did you expect?" asked MacIan, opening his great
grave blue eyes. "The papers are full of us," said Turnbull, stooping to pick up
one of the swords. MacIan stooped and picked up the other. "Yes," he said, in his simple way. "I have read what they have to
say. But they don't seem to understand the point." "The point of what?" asked Turnbull. "The point of the sword," said MacIan, violently, and planted the
steel point in the soil like a man planting a tree. "That is a point," said Turnbull, grimly, "that we will discuss
later. Come along." Turnbull tied the last tin of biscuits desperately to himself
with string; and then spoke, like a diver girt for plunging,
short and sharp. "Now, Mr. MacIan, you must listen to me. You must listen to me,
not merely because I know the country, which you might learn by
looking at a map, but because I know the people of the country,
whom you could not know by living here thirty years. That
infernal city down there is awake; and it is awake against us. All those endless rows of windows and windows are all eyes
staring at us. All those forests of chimneys are fingers pointing
at us, as we stand here on the hillside. This thing has caught
on. For the next six mortal months they will think of nothing but
us, as for six mortal months they thought of nothing but the
Dreyfus case. Oh, I know it's funny. They let starving children,
who don't want to die, drop by the score without looking round. But because two gentlemen, from private feelings of delicacy, do
want to die, they will mobilize the army and navy to prevent
them. For half a year or more, you and I, Mr. MacIan, will be an
obstacle to every reform in the British Empire. We shall prevent
the Chinese being sent out of the Transvaal and the blocks being
stopped in the Strand. We shall be the conversational substitute
when anyone recommends Home Rule, or complains of sky signs. Therefore, do not imagine, in your innocence, that we have only
to melt away among those English hills as a Highland cateran
might into your god-forsaken Highland mountains. We must be
eternally on our guard; we must live the hunted life of two
distinguished criminals. We must expect to be recognized as much
as if we were Napoleon escaping from Elba. We must be prepared
for our descriptions being sent to every tiny village, and for
our faces being recognized by every ambitious policeman. We must
often sleep under the stars as if we were in Africa. Last and
most important we must not dream of effecting our--our final
settlement, which will be a thing as famous as the Phoenix Park
murders, unless we have made real and precise arrangements for
our isolation--I will not say our safety. We must not, in short,
fight until we have thrown them off our scent, if only for a
moment. For, take my word for it, Mr. MacIan, if the British
Public once catches us up, the British Public will prevent the
duel, if it is only by locking us both up in asylums for the rest
of our days." MacIan was looking at the horizon with a rather misty look. "I am not at all surprised," he said, "at the world being against
us. It makes me feel I was right to----"

"Yes?" said Turnbull. "To smash your window," said MacIan. "I have woken up the world." "Very well, then," said Turnbull, stolidly. "Let us look at a few
final facts. Beyond that hill there is comparatively clear
country. Fortunately, I know the part well, and if you will
follow me exactly, and, when necessary, on your stomach, we may
be able to get ten miles out of London, literally without meeting
anyone at all, which will be the best possible beginning, at any
rate. We have provisions for at least two days and two nights,
three days if we do it carefully. We may be able to get fifty or
sixty miles away without even walking into an inn door. I have
the biscuits and the tinned meat, and the milk. You have the
chocolate, I think? And the brandy?" "Yes," said MacIan, like a soldier taking orders. "Very well, then, come on. March. We turn under that third bush
and so down into the valley." And he set off ahead at a swinging
walk. Then he stopped suddenly; for he realized that the other was not
following. Evan MacIan was leaning on his sword with a lowering
face, like a man suddenly smitten still with doubt. "What on earth is the matter?" asked Turnbull, staring in some
anger. Evan made no reply. "What the deuce is the matter with you?" demanded the leader,
again, his face slowly growing as red as his beard; then he said,
suddenly, and in a more human voice, "Are you in pain, MacIan?" "Yes," replied the Highlander, without lifting his face. "Take some brandy," cried Turnbull, walking forward hurriedly
towards him. "You've got it." "It's not in the body," said MacIan, in his dull, strange way. "The pain has come into my mind. A very dreadful thing has just
come into my thoughts." "What the devil are you talking about?" asked Turnbull. MacIan broke out with a queer and living voice. "We must fight now, Turnbull. We must fight now. A frightful
thing has come upon me, and I know it must be now and here. I
must kill you here," he cried, with a sort of tearful rage
impossible to describe. "Here, here, upon this blessed grass." "Why, you idiot," began Turnbull. "The hour has come--the black hour God meant for it. Quick, it
will soon be gone. Quick!" And he flung the scabbard from him furiously, and stood with the
sunlight sparkling along his sword. "You confounded fool," repeated Turnbull. "Put that thing up
again, you ass; people will come out of that house at the first
clash of the steel." "One of us will be dead before they come," said the other,
hoarsely, "for this is the hour God meant." "Well, I never thought much of God," said the editor of _The
Atheist_, losing all patience. "And I think less now. Never mind
what God meant. Kindly enlighten my pagan darkness as to what the
devil _you_ mean." "The hour will soon be gone. In a moment it will be gone," said
the madman. "It is now, now, now that I must nail your
blaspheming body to the earth--now, now that I must avenge Our
Lady on her vile slanderer. Now or never. For the dreadful
thought is in my mind." "And what thought," asked Turnbull, with frantic composure,
"occupies what you call your mind?" "I must kill you now," said the fanatic, "because----"

"Well, because," said Turnbull, patiently. "Because I have begun to like you." Turnbull's face had a sudden spasm in the sunlight, a change so
instantaneous that it left no trace behind it; and his features
seemed still carved into a cold stare. But when he spoke again he
seemed like a man who was placidly pretending to misunderstand
something that he understood perfectly well. "Your affection expresses itself in an abrupt form," he began,
but MacIan broke the brittle and frivolous speech to pieces with
a violent voice. "Do not trouble to talk like that," he said. "You know what I mean as well as I know it. Come on and fight, I
say. Perhaps you are feeling just as I do." Turnbull's face flinched again in the fierce sunlight, but his
attitude kept its contemptuous ease. "Your Celtic mind really goes too fast for me," he said; "let me
be permitted in my heavy Lowland way to understand this new
development. My dear Mr. MacIan, what do you really mean?" MacIan still kept the shining sword-point towards the other's
breast. "You know what I mean. You mean the same yourself. We must
fight now or else----"

"Or else?" repeated Turnbull, staring at him with an almost
blinding gravity. "Or else we may not want to fight at all," answered Evan, and the
end of his speech was like a despairing cry. Turnbull took out his own sword suddenly as if to engage; then
planting it point downwards for a moment, he said, "Before we
begin, may I ask you a question?" MacIan bowed patiently, but with burning eyes. "You said, just now," continued Turnbull, presently, "that if we
did not fight now, we might not want to fight at all. How would
you feel about the matter if we came not to want to fight at
all?" "I should feel," answered the other, "just as I should feel if
you had drawn your sword, and I had run away from it. I should
feel that because I had been weak, justice had not been done." "Justice," answered Turnbull, with a thoughtful smile, "but we
are talking about your feelings. And what do you mean by justice,
apart from your feelings?" MacIan made a gesture of weary recognition! "Oh, Nominalism," he
said, with a sort of sigh, "we had all that out in the twelfth
century." "I wish we could have it out now," replied the other, firmly. "Do
you really mean that if you came to think me right, you would be
certainly wrong?" "If I had a blow on the back of my head, I might come to think
you a green elephant," answered MacIan, "but have I not the right
to say now, that if I thought that I should think wrong?" "Then you are quite certain that it would be wrong to like me?" asked Turnbull, with a slight smile. "No," said Evan, thoughtfully, "I do not say that. It may not be
the devil, it may be some part of God I am not meant to know. But
I had a work to do, and it is making the work difficult." "And I suppose," said the atheist, quite gently, "that you and I
know all about which part of God we ought to know." MacIan burst out like a man driven back and explaining
everything. "The Church is not a thing like the Athenaeum Club," he cried. "If the Athenaeum Club lost all its members, the Athenaeum Club
would dissolve and cease to exist. But when we belong to the
Church we belong to something which is outside all of us; which
is outside everything you talk about, outside the Cardinals and
the Pope. They belong to it, but it does not belong to them. If
we all fell dead suddenly, the Church would still somehow exist
in God. Confound it all, don't you see that I am more sure of its
existence than I am of my own existence? And yet you ask me to
trust my temperament, my own temperament, which can be turned
upside down by two bottles of claret or an attack of the
jaundice. You ask me to trust that when it softens towards you
and not to trust the thing which I believe to be outside myself
and more real than the blood in my body." "Stop a moment," said Turnbull, in the same easy tone, "Even in
the very act of saying that you believe this or that, you imply
that there is a part of yourself that you trust even if there are
many parts which you mistrust. If it is only you that like me,
surely, also, it is only you that believe in the Catholic
Church." Evan remained in an unmoved and grave attitude. "There is a part
of me which is divine," he answered, "a part that can be trusted,
but there are also affections which are entirely animal and
idle." "And you are quite certain, I suppose," continued Turnbull, "that
if even you esteem me the esteem would be wholly animal and
idle?" For the first time MacIan started as if he had not
expected the thing that was said to him. At last he said:

"Whatever in earth or heaven it is that has joined us two
together, it seems to be something which makes it impossible to
lie. No, I do not think that the movement in me towards you
was...was that surface sort of thing. It may have been something
deeper...something strange. I cannot understand the thing at all. But understand this and understand it thoroughly, if I loved you
my love might be divine. No, it is not some trifle that we are
fighting about. It is not some superstition or some symbol. When
you wrote those words about Our Lady, you were in that act a
wicked man doing a wicked thing. If I hate you it is because you
have hated goodness. And if I like you...it is because you are
good." Turnbull's face wore an indecipherable expression. "Well, shall we fight now?" he said. "Yes," said MacIan, with a sudden contraction of his black brows,
"yes, it must be now." The bright swords crossed, and the first touch of them,
travelling down blade and arm, told each combatant that the heart
of the other was awakened. It was not in that way that the swords
rang together when they had rushed on each other in the little
garden behind the dealer's shop. There was a pause, and then MacIan made a movement as if to
thrust, and almost at the same moment Turnbull suddenly and
calmly dropped his sword. Evan stared round in an unusual
bewilderment, and then realized that a large man in pale clothes
and a Panama hat was strolling serenely towards them. V. THE PEACEMAKER

When the combatants, with crossed swords, became suddenly
conscious of a third party, they each made the same movement. It
was as quick as the snap of a pistol, and they altered it
instantaneously and recovered their original pose, but they had
both made it, they had both seen it, and they both knew what it
was. It was not a movement of anger at being interrupted. Say or
think what they would, it was a movement of relief. A force
within them, and yet quite beyond them, seemed slowly and
pitilessly washing away the adamant of their oath. As mistaken
lovers might watch the inevitable sunset of first love, these men
watched the sunset of their first hatred. Their hearts were growing weaker and weaker against each other. When their weapons rang and riposted in the little London garden,
they could have been very certain that if a third party had
interrupted them something at least would have happened. They
would have killed each other or they would have killed him. But
now nothing could undo or deny that flash of fact, that for a
second they had been glad to be interrupted. Some new and strange
thing was rising higher and higher in their hearts like a high
sea at night. It was something that seemed all the more
merciless, because it might turn out an enormous mercy. Was
there, perhaps, some such fatalism in friendship as all lovers
talk about in love? Did God make men love each other against
their will? "I'm sure you'll excuse my speaking to you," said the stranger,
in a voice at once eager and deprecating. The voice was too polite for good manners. It was incongruous
with the eccentric spectacle of the duellists which ought to have
startled a sane and free man. It was also incongruous with the
full and healthy, though rather loose physique of the man who
spoke. At the first glance he looked a fine animal, with curling
gold beard and hair, and blue eyes, unusually bright. It was only
at the second glance that the mind felt a sudden and perhaps
unmeaning irritation at the way in which the gold beard retreated
backwards into the waistcoat, and the way in which the finely
shaped nose went forward as if smelling its way. And it was only,
perhaps, at the hundredth glance that the bright blue eyes, which
normally before and after the instant seemed brilliant with
intelligence, seemed as it were to be brilliant with idiocy. He
was a heavy, healthy-looking man, who looked all the larger
because of the loose, light coloured clothes that he wore, and
that had in their extreme lightness and looseness, almost a touch
of the tropics. But a closer examination of his attire would have
shown that even in the tropics it would have been unique; but it
was all woven according to some hygienic texture which no human
being had ever heard of before, and which was absolutely
necessary even for a day's health. He wore a huge broad-brimmed
hat, equally hygienic, very much at the back of his head, and his
voice coming out of so heavy and hearty a type of man was, as I
have said, startlingly shrill and deferential. "I'm sure you'll excuse my speaking to you," he said. "Now, I
wonder if you are in some little difficulty which, after all, we
could settle very comfortably together? Now, you don't mind my
saying this, do you?" The face of both combatants remained somewhat solid under this
appeal. But the stranger, probably taking their silence for a
gathering shame, continued with a kind of gaiety:

"So you are the young men I have read about in the papers. Well,
of course, when one is young, one is rather romantic. Do you know
what I always say to young people?" A blank silence followed this gay inquiry. Then Turnbull said in
a colourless voice:

"As I was forty-seven last birthday, I probably came into the
world too soon for the experience." "Very good, very good," said the friendly person. "Dry Scotch
humour. Dry Scotch humour. Well now. I understand that you two
people want to fight a duel. I suppose you aren't much up in the
modern world. We've quite outgrown duelling, you know. In fact,
Tolstoy tells us that we shall soon outgrow war, which he says is
simply a duel between nations. A duel between nations. But there
is no doubt about our having outgrown duelling." Waiting for some effect upon his wooden auditors, the stranger
stood beaming for a moment and then resumed:

"Now, they tell me in the newspapers that you are really wanting
to fight about something connected with Roman Catholicism. Now,
do you know what I always say to Roman Catholics?" "No," said Turnbull, heavily. "Do _they_?" It seemed to be a
characteristic of the hearty, hygienic gentleman that he always
forgot the speech he had made the moment before. Without
enlarging further on the fixed form of his appeal to the Church
of Rome, he laughed cordially at Turnbull's answer; then his
wandering blue eyes caught the sunlight on the swords, and he
assumed a good-humoured gravity. "But you know this is a serious matter," he said, eyeing Turnbull
and MacIan, as if they had just been keeping the table in a roar
with their frivolities. "I am sure that if I appealed to your
higher natures...your higher natures. Every man has a higher
nature and a lower nature. Now, let us put the matter very
plainly, and without any romantic nonsense about honour or
anything of that sort. Is not bloodshed a great sin?" "No," said MacIan, speaking for the first time. "Well, really, really!" said the peacemaker. "Murder is a sin," said the immovable Highlander. "There is no
sin of bloodshed." "Well, we won't quarrel about a word," said the other,
pleasantly. "Why on earth not?" said MacIan, with a sudden asperity. "Why
shouldn't we quarrel about a word? What is the good of words if
they aren't important enough to quarrel over? Why do we choose
one word more than another if there isn't any difference between
them? If you called a woman a chimpanzee instead of an angel,
wouldn't there be a quarrel about a word? If you're not going to
argue about words, what are you going to argue about? Are you
going to convey your meaning to me by moving your ears? The
Church and the heresies always used to fight about words, because
they are the only things worth fighting about. I say that murder
is a sin, and bloodshed is not, and that there is as much
difference between those words as there is between the word 'yes'
and the word 'no'; or rather more difference, for 'yes' and 'no',
at least, belong to the same category. Murder is a spiritual
incident. Bloodshed is a physical incident. A surgeon commits
bloodshed. "Ah, you're a casuist!" said the large man, wagging his head. "Now, do you know what I always say to casuists...?" MacIan made a violent gesture; and Turnbull broke into open
laughter. The peacemaker did not seem to be in the least annoyed,
but continued in unabated enjoyment. "Well, well," he said, "let us get back to the point. Now Tolstoy
has shown that force is no remedy; so you see the position in
which I am placed. I am doing my best to stop what I'm sure you
won't mind my calling this really useless violence, this really
quite wrong violence of yours. But it's against my principles to
call in the police against you, because the police are still on a
lower moral plane, so to speak, because, in short, the police
undoubtedly sometimes employ force. Tolstoy has shown that
violence merely breeds violence in the person towards whom it is
used, whereas Love, on the other hand, breeds Love. So you see
how I am placed. I am reduced to use Love in order to stop you. I am obliged to use Love." He gave to the word an indescribable sound of something hard and
heavy, as if he were saying "boots". Turnbull suddenly gripped
his sword and said, shortly, "I see how you are placed quite
well, sir. You will not call the police. Mr. MacIan, shall we
engage?" MacIan plucked his sword out of the grass. "I must and will stop this shocking crime," cried the Tolstoian,
crimson in the face. "It is against all modern ideas. It is
against the principle of love. How you, sir, who pretend to be a
Christian..."

MacIan turned upon him with a white face and bitter lip. "Sir,"
he said, "talk about the principle of love as much as you like. You seem to me colder than a lump of stone; but I am willing to
believe that you may at some time have loved a cat, or a dog, or
a child. When you were a baby, I suppose you loved your mother. Talk about love, then, till the world is sick of the word. But
don't you talk about Christianity. Don't you dare to say one
word, white or black, about it. Christianity is, as far as you
are concerned, a horrible mystery. Keep clear of it, keep silent
upon it, as you would upon an abomination. It is a thing that has
made men slay and torture each other; and you will never know
why. It is a thing that has made men do evil that good might
come; and you will never understand the evil, let alone the good. Christianity is a thing that could only make you vomit, till you
are other than you are. I would not justify it to you even if I
could. Hate it, in God's name, as Turnbull does, who is a man. It is a monstrous thing, for which men die. And if you will stand
here and talk about love for another ten minutes it is very
probable that you will see a man die for it." And he fell on guard. Turnbull was busy settling something loose
in his elaborate hilt, and the pause was broken by the stranger. "Suppose I call the police?" he said, with a heated face. "And deny your most sacred dogma," said MacIan. "Dogma!" cried the man, in a sort of dismay. "Oh, we have no
_dogmas_, you know!" There was another silence, and he said again, airily:

"You know, I think, there's something in what Shaw teaches about
no moral principles being quite fixed. Have you ever read _The
Quintessence of Ibsenism_? Of course he went very wrong over the
war." Turnbull, with a bent, flushed face, was tying up the loose piece
of the pommel with string. With the string in his teeth, he said,
"Oh, make up your damned mind and clear out!" "It's a serious thing," said the philosopher, shaking his head. "I must be alone and consider which is the higher point of view. I rather feel that in a case so extreme as this..." and he went
slowly away. As he disappeared among the trees, they heard him
murmuring in a sing-song voice, "New occasions teach new duties,"
out of a poem by James Russell Lowell. "Ah," said MacIan, drawing a deep breath. "Don't you believe in
prayer now? I prayed for an angel." "An hour ago," said the Highlander, in his heavy meditative
voice, "I felt the devil weakening my heart and my oath against
you, and I prayed that God would send an angel to my aid." "Well?" inquired the other, finishing his mending and wrapping
the rest of the string round his hand to get a firmer grip. "Well?" "Well, that man was an angel," said MacIan. "I didn't know they were as bad as that," answered Turnbull. "We know that devils sometimes quote Scripture and counterfeit
good," replied the mystic. "Why should not angels sometimes come
to show us the black abyss of evil on whose brink we stand. If
that man had not tried to stop us...I might...I might have
stopped." "I know what you mean," said Turnbull, grimly. "But then he came," broke out MacIan, "and my soul said to me:
'Give up fighting, and you will become like That. Give up vows
and dogmas, and fixed things, and you may grow like That. You may
learn, also, that fog of false philosophy. You may grow fond of
that mire of crawling, cowardly morals, and you may come to think
a blow bad, because it hurts, and not because it humiliates. You
may come to think murder wrong, because it is violent, and not
because it is unjust. Oh, you blasphemer of the good, an hour ago
I almost loved you! But do not fear for me now. I have heard the
word Love pronounced in _his_ intonation; and I know exactly what
it means. On guard!'" The swords caught on each other with a dreadful clang and jar,
full of the old energy and hate; and at once plunged and
replunged. Once more each man's heart had become the magnet of a
mad sword. Suddenly, furious as they were, they were frozen for a
moment motionless. "What noise is that?" asked the Highlander, hoarsely. "I think I know," replied Turnbull. "What?... What?" cried the other. "The student of Shaw and Tolstoy has made up his remarkable
mind," said Turnbull, quietly. "The police are coming up the
hill." VI. THE OTHER PHILOSOPHER

Between high hedges in Hertfordshire, hedges so high as to create
a kind of grove, two men were running. They did not run in a
scampering or feverish manner, but in the steady swing of the
pendulum. Across the great plains and uplands to the right and
left of the lane, a long tide of sunset light rolled like a sea
of ruby, lighting up the long terraces of the hills and picking
out the few windows of the scattered hamlets in startling
blood-red sparks. But the lane was cut deep in the hill and
remained in an abrupt shadow. The two men running in it had an
impression not uncommonly experienced between those wild green
English walls; a sense of being led between the walls of a maze. Though their pace was steady it was vigorous; their faces were
heated and their eyes fixed and bright. There was, indeed,
something a little mad in the contrast between the evening's
stillness over the empty country-side, and these two figures
fleeing wildly from nothing. They had the look of two lunatics,
possibly they were. "Are you all right?" said Turnbull, with civility. "Can you keep
this up?" "Quite easily, thank you," replied MacIan. "I run very well." "Is that a qualification in a family of warriors?" asked
Turnbull. "Undoubtedly. Rapid movement is essential," answered MacIan, who
never saw a joke in his life. Turnbull broke out into a short laugh, and silence fell between
them, the panting silence of runners. Then MacIan said: "We run better than any of those policemen. They are too fat. Why do you make your policemen so fat?" "I didn't do much towards making them fat myself," replied
Turnbull, genially, "but I flatter myself that I am now doing
something towards making them thin. You'll see they will be as
lean as rakes by the time they catch us. They will look like your
friend, Cardinal Manning." "But they won't catch us," said MacIan, in his literal way. "No, we beat them in the great military art of running away,"
returned the other. "They won't catch us unless----"

MacIan turned his long equine face inquiringly. "Unless what?" he
said, for Turnbull had gone silent suddenly, and seemed to be
listening intently as he ran as a horse does with his ears turned
back. "Unless what?" repeated the Highlander. "Unless they do--what they have done. Listen." MacIan slackened
his trot, and turned his head to the trail they had left behind
them. Across two or three billows of the up and down lane came
along the ground the unmistakable throbbing of horses' hoofs. "They have put the mounted police on us," said Turnbull, shortly. "Good Lord, one would think we were a Revolution." "So we are," said MacIan calmly. "What shall we do? Shall we turn
on them with our points?" "It may come to that," answered Turnbull, "though if it does, I
reckon that will be the last act. We must put it off if we can." And he stared and peered about him between the bushes. "If we
could hide somewhere the beasts might go by us," he said. "The
police have their faults, but thank God they're inefficient. Why,
here's the very thing. Be quick and quiet. Follow me." He suddenly swung himself up the high bank on one side of the
lane. It was almost as high and smooth as a wall, and on the top
of it the black hedge stood out over them as an angle, almost
like a thatched roof of the lane. And the burning evening sky
looked down at them through the tangle with red eyes as of an
army of goblins. Turnbull hoisted himself up and broke the hedge with his body. As
his head and shoulders rose above it they turned to flame in the
full glow as if lit up by an immense firelight. His red hair and
beard looked almost scarlet, and his pale face as bright as a
boy's. Something violent, something that was at once love and
hatred, surged in the strange heart of the Gael below him. He had
an unutterable sense of epic importance, as if he were somehow
lifting all humanity into a prouder and more passionate region of
the air. As he swung himself up also into the evening light he
felt as if he were rising on enormous wings. Legends of the morning of the world which he had heard in
childhood or read in youth came back upon him in a cloudy
splendour, purple tales of wrath and friendship, like Roland and
Oliver, or Balin and Balan, reminding him of emotional
entanglements. Men who had loved each other and then fought each
other; men who had fought each other and then loved each other,
together made a mixed but monstrous sense of momentousness. The
crimson seas of the sunset seemed to him like a bursting out of
some sacred blood, as if the heart of the world had broken. Turnbull was wholly unaffected by any written or spoken poetry;
his was a powerful and prosaic mind. But even upon him there came
for the moment something out of the earth and the passionate ends
of the sky. The only evidence was in his voice, which was still
practical but a shade more quiet. "Do you see that summer-house-looking thing over there?" he asked
shortly. "That will do for us very well." Keeping himself free from the tangle of the hedge he strolled
across a triangle of obscure kitchen garden, and approached a
dismal shed or lodge a yard or two beyond it. It was a
weather-stained hut of grey wood, which with all its desolation
retained a tag or two of trivial ornament, which suggested that
the thing had once been a sort of summer-house, and the place
probably a sort of garden. "That is quite invisible from the road," said Turnbull, as he
entered it, "and it will cover us up for the night." MacIan looked at him gravely for a few moments. "Sir," he said,
"I ought to say something to you. I ought to say----"

"Hush," said Turnbull, suddenly lifting his hand; "be still,
man." In the sudden silence, the drumming of the distant horses grew
louder and louder with inconceivable rapidity, and the cavalcade
of police rushed by below them in the lane, almost with the roar
and rattle of an express train. "I ought to tell you," continued MacIan, still staring stolidly
at the other, "that you are a great chief, and it is good to go
to war behind you." Turnbull said nothing, but turned and looked out of the foolish
lattice of the little windows, then he said, "We must have food
and sleep first." When the last echo of their eluded pursuers had died in the
distant uplands, Turnbull began to unpack the provisions with the
easy air of a man at a picnic. He had just laid out the last
items, put a bottle of wine on the floor, and a tin of salmon on
the window-ledge, when the bottomless silence of that forgotten
place was broken. And it was broken by three heavy blows of a
stick delivered upon the door. Turnbull looked up in the act of opening a tin and stared
silently at his companion. MacIan's long, lean mouth had shut
hard. "Who the devil can that be?" said Turnbull. "God knows," said the other. "It might be God." Again the sound of the wooden stick reverberated on the wooden
door. It was a curious sound and on consideration did not
resemble the ordinary effects of knocking on a door for
admittance. It was rather as if the point of a stick were plunged
again and again at the panels in an absurd attempt to make a hole
in them. A wild look sprang into MacIan's eyes and he got up half
stupidly, with a kind of stagger, put his hand out and caught one
of the swords. "Let us fight at once," he cried, "it is the end
of the world." "You're overdone, MacIan," said Turnbull, putting him on one
side. "It's only someone playing the goat. Let me open the
door." But he also picked up a sword as he stepped to open it. He paused one moment with his hand on the handle and then flung
the door open. Almost as he did so the ferrule of an ordinary
bamboo cane came at his eyes, so that he had actually to parry it
with the naked weapon in his hands. As the two touched, the point
of the stick was dropped very abruptly, and the man with the
stick stepped hurriedly back. Against the heraldic background of sprawling crimson and gold
offered him by the expiring sunset, the figure of the man with
the stick showed at first merely black and fantastic. He was a
small man with two wisps of long hair that curled up on each
side, and seen in silhouette, looked like horns. He had a bow tie
so big that the two ends showed on each side of his neck like
unnatural stunted wings. He had his long black cane still tilted
in his hand like a fencing foil and half presented at the open
door. His large straw hat had fallen behind him as he leapt
backwards. "With reference to your suggestion, MacIan," said Turnbull,
placidly, "I think it looks more like the Devil." "Who on earth are you?" cried the stranger in a high shrill
voice, brandishing his cane defensively. "Let me see," said Turnbull, looking round to MacIan with the
same blandness. "Who are we?" "Come out," screamed the little man with the stick. "Certainly," said Turnbull, and went outside with the sword,
MacIan following. Seen more fully, with the evening light on his face, the strange
man looked a little less like a goblin. He wore a square
pale-grey jacket suit, on which the grey butterfly tie was the
only indisputable touch of affectation. Against the great sunset
his figure had looked merely small: seen in a more equal light it
looked tolerably compact and shapely. His reddish-brown hair,
combed into two great curls, looked like the long, slow curling
hair of the women in some pre-Raphaelite pictures. But within
this feminine frame of hair his face was unexpectedly impudent,
like a monkey's. "What are you doing here?" he said, in a sharp small voice. "Well," said MacIan, in his grave childish way, "what are _you_
doing here?" "I," said the man, indignantly, "I'm in my own garden." "Oh," said MacIan, simply, "I apologize." Turnbull was coolly curling his red moustache, and the stranger
stared from one to the other, temporarily stunned by their
innocent assurance. "But, may I ask," he said at last, "what the devil you are doing
in my summer-house?" "Certainly," said MacIan. "We were just going to fight." "To fight!" repeated the man. "We had better tell this gentleman the whole business," broke in
Turnbull. Then turning to the stranger he said firmly, "I am
sorry, sir, but we have something to do that must be done. And I
may as well tell you at the beginning and to avoid waste of time
or language, that we cannot admit any interference." "We were just going to take some slight refreshment when you
interrupted us..."

The little man had a dawning expression of understanding and
stooped and picked up the unused bottle of wine, eyeing it
curiously. Turnbull continued:

"But that refreshment was preparatory to something which I fear
you will find less comprehensible, but on which our minds are
entirely fixed, sir. We are forced to fight a duel. We are forced
by honour and an internal intellectual need. Do not, for your own
sake, attempt to stop us. I know all the excellent and ethical
things that you will want to say to us. I know all about the
essential requirements of civil order: I have written leading
articles about them all my life. I know all about the sacredness
of human life; I have bored all my friends with it. Try and
understand our position. This man and I are alone in the modern
world in that we think that God is essentially important. I think
He does not exist; that is where the importance comes in for me. But this man thinks that He does exist, and thinking that very
properly thinks Him more important than anything else. Now we
wish to make a great demonstration and assertion--something that
will set the world on fire like the first Christian persecutions. If you like, we are attempting a mutual martyrdom. The papers
have posted up every town against us. Scotland Yard has fortified
every police station with our enemies; we are driven therefore to
the edge of a lonely lane, and indirectly to taking liberties
with your summer-house in order to arrange our..."

"Stop!" roared the little man in the butterfly necktie. "Put me
out of my intellectual misery. Are you really the two tomfools I
have read of in all the papers? Are you the two people who wanted
to spit each other in the Police Court? Are you? Are you?" "Yes," said MacIan, "it began in a Police Court." The little man slung the bottle of wine twenty yards away like a
stone. "Come up to my place," he said. "I've got better stuff than that. I've got the best Beaune within fifty miles of here. Come up. You're the very men I wanted to see." Even Turnbull, with his typical invulnerability, was a little
taken aback by this boisterous and almost brutal hospitality. "Why...sir..." he began. "Come up! Come in!" howled the little man, dancing with delight. "I'll give you a dinner. I'll give you a bed! I'll give you a
green smooth lawn and your choice of swords and pistols. Why, you
fools, I adore fighting! It's the only good thing in God's world! I've walked about these damned fields and longed to see somebody
cut up and killed and the blood running. Ha! Ha!" And he made sudden lunges with his stick at the trunk of a
neighbouring tree so that the ferrule made fierce prints and
punctures in the bark. "Excuse me," said MacIan suddenly with the wide-eyed curiosity of
a child, "excuse me, but..."

"Well?" said the small fighter, brandishing his wooden weapon. "Excuse me," repeated MacIan, "but was that what you were doing
at the door?" The little man stared an instant and then said: "Yes," and
Turnbull broke into a guffaw. "Come on!" cried the little man, tucking his stick under his arm
and taking quite suddenly to his heels. "Come on! Confound me,
I'll see both of you eat and then I'll see one of you die. Lord
bless me, the gods must exist after all--they have sent me one of
my day-dreams! Lord! A duel!" He had gone flying along a winding path between the borders of
the kitchen garden, and in the increasing twilight he was as hard
to follow as a flying hare. But at length the path after many
twists betrayed its purpose and led abruptly up two or three
steps to the door of a tiny but very clean cottage. There was
nothing about the outside to distinguish it from other cottages,
except indeed its ominous cleanliness and one thing that was out
of all the custom and tradition of all cottages under the sun. In the middle of the little garden among the stocks and marigolds
there surged up in shapeless stone a South Sea Island idol. There
was something gross and even evil in that eyeless and alien god
among the most innocent of the English flowers. "Come in!" cried the creature again. "Come in! it's better
inside!" Whether or no it was better inside it was at least a surprise. The moment the two duellists had pushed open the door of that
inoffensive, whitewashed cottage they found that its interior was
lined with fiery gold. It was like stepping into a chamber in the
Arabian Nights. The door that closed behind them shut out England
and all the energies of the West. The ornaments that shone and
shimmered on every side of them were subtly mixed from many
periods and lands, but were all oriental. Cruel Assyrian
bas-reliefs ran along the sides of the passage; cruel Turkish
swords and daggers glinted above and below them; the two were
separated by ages and fallen civilizations. Yet they seemed to
sympathize since they were both harmonious and both merciless. The house seemed to consist of chamber within chamber and created
that impression as of a dream which belongs also to the Arabian
Nights themselves. The innermost room of all was like the inside
of a jewel. The little man who owned it all threw himself on a
heap of scarlet and golden cushions and struck his hands
together. A negro in a white robe and turban appeared suddenly
and silently behind them. "Selim," said the host, "these two gentlemen are staying with me
tonight.