6:14 And the elders of the Jews builded, and they prospered through
the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they builded, and finished it, according to the commandment of the
God of Israel, and according to the commandment of Cyrus, and Darius,
and Artaxerxes king of Persia. 6:15 And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar,
which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king. 6:16 And the children of Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the
rest of the children of the captivity, kept the dedication of this
house of God with joy. 6:17 And offered at the dedication of this house of God an hundred
bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs; and for a sin offering
for all Israel, twelve he goats, according to the number of the tribes
of Israel. 6:18 And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in
their courses, for the service of God, which is at Jerusalem; as it is
written in the book of Moses. 6:19 And the children of the captivity kept the passover upon the
fourteenth day of the first month. 6:20 For the priests and the Levites were purified together, all of
them were pure, and killed the passover for all the children of the
captivity, and for their brethren the priests, and for themselves. 6:21 And the children of Israel, which were come again out of
captivity, and all such as had separated themselves unto them from the
filthiness of the heathen of the land, to seek the LORD God of Israel,
did eat, 6:22 And kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with
joy: for the LORD had made them joyful, and turned the heart of the
king of Assyria unto them, to strengthen their hands in the work of
the house of God, the God of Israel. 7:1 Now after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia,
Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah, 7:2
The son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub, 7:3 The son
of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth, 7:4 The son of
Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki, 7:5 The son of Abishua,
the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief
priest: 7:6 This Ezra went up from Babylon; and he was a ready scribe
in the law of Moses, which the LORD God of Israel had given: and the
king granted him all his request, according to the hand of the LORD
his God upon him. 7:7 And there went up some of the children of Israel, and of the
priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the
Nethinims, unto Jerusalem, in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king. 7:8 And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the
seventh year of the king. 7:9 For upon the first day of the first month began he to go up from
Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month came he to Jerusalem,
according to the good hand of his God upon him. 7:10 For Ezra had prepared his heart to seek the law of the LORD, and
to do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and judgments. 7:11 Now this is the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave
unto Ezra the priest, the scribe, even a scribe of the words of the
commandments of the LORD, and of his statutes to Israel. 7:12 Artaxerxes, king of kings, unto Ezra the priest, a scribe of the
law of the God of heaven, perfect peace, and at such a time. 7:13 I make a decree, that all they of the people of Israel, and of
his priests and Levites, in my realm, which are minded of their own
freewill to go up to Jerusalem, go with thee. 7:14 Forasmuch as thou art sent of the king, and of his seven
counsellors, to enquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to
the law of thy God which is in thine hand; 7:15 And to carry the
silver and gold, which the king and his counsellors have freely
offered unto the God of Israel, whose habitation is in Jerusalem, 7:16
And all the silver and gold that thou canst find in all the province
of Babylon, with the freewill offering of the people, and of the
priests, offering willingly for the house of their God which is in
Jerusalem: 7:17 That thou mayest buy speedily with this money
bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meat offerings and their drink
offerings, and offer them upon the altar of the house of your God
which is in Jerusalem. 7:18 And whatsoever shall seem good to thee, and to thy brethren, to
do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do after the will of
your God. 7:19 The vessels also that are given thee for the service of the house
of thy God, those deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem. 7:20 And whatsoever more shall be needful for the house of thy God,
which thou shalt have occasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king's
treasure house. 7:21 And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the
treasurers which are beyond the river, that whatsoever Ezra the
priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shall require of
you, it be done speedily, 7:22 Unto an hundred talents of silver, and
to an hundred measures of wheat, and to an hundred baths of wine, and
to an hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much. 7:23 Whatsoever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be
diligently done for the house of the God of heaven: for why should
there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons? 7:24 Also
we certify you, that touching any of the priests and Levites, singers,
porters, Nethinims, or ministers of this house of God, it shall not be
lawful to impose toll, tribute, or custom, upon them. 7:25 And thou, Ezra, after the wisdom of thy God, that is in thine
hand, set magistrates and judges, which may judge all the people that
are beyond the river, all such as know the laws of thy God; and teach
ye them that know them not. 7:26 And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the
king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto
death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to
imprisonment. 7:27 Blessed be the LORD God of our fathers, which hath put such a
thing as this in the king's heart, to beautify the house of the LORD
which is in Jerusalem: 7:28 And hath extended mercy unto me before the
king, and his counsellors, and before all the king's mighty princes. And I was strengthened as the hand of the LORD my God was upon me, and
I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me. 8:1 These are now the chief of their fathers, and this is the
genealogy of them that went up with me from Babylon, in the reign of
Artaxerxes the king. 8:2 Of the sons of Phinehas; Gershom: of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel:
of the sons of David; Hattush. 8:3 Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh; Zechariah: and
with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males an hundred and fifty. 8:4 Of the sons of Pahathmoab; Elihoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with
him two hundred males. 8:5 Of the sons of Shechaniah; the son of Jahaziel, and with him three
hundred males. 8:6 Of the sons also of Adin; Ebed the son of Jonathan, and with him
fifty males. 8:7 And of the sons of Elam; Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah, and with
him seventy males. 8:8 And of the sons of Shephatiah; Zebadiah the son of Michael, and
with him fourscore males. 8:9 Of the sons of Joab; Obadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him two
hundred and eighteen males. 8:10 And of the sons of Shelomith; the son of Josiphiah, and with him
an hundred and threescore males. 8:11 And of the sons of Bebai; Zechariah the son of Bebai, and with
him twenty and eight males. 8:12 And of the sons of Azgad; Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with
him an hundred and ten males. 8:13 And of the last sons of Adonikam, whose names are these,
Eliphelet, Jeiel, and Shemaiah, and with them threescore males. 8:14 Of the sons also of Bigvai; Uthai, and Zabbud, and with them
seventy males. 8:15 And I gathered them together to the river that runneth to Ahava;
and there abode we in tents three days: and I viewed the people, and
the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi. 8:16 Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for
Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for
Zechariah, and for Meshullam, chief men; also for Joiarib, and for
Elnathan, men of understanding. 8:17 And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief at the place
Casiphia, and I told them what they should say unto Iddo, and to his
brethren the Nethinims, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring
unto us ministers for the house of our God. 8:18 And by the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of
understanding, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of
Israel; and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brethren, eighteen; 8:19
And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his
brethren and their sons, twenty; 8:20 Also of the Nethinims, whom
David and the princes had appointed for the service of the Levites,
two hundred and twenty Nethinims: all of them were expressed by name. 8:21 Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river of Ahava, that we
might afflict ourselves before our God, to seek of him a right way for
us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance. 8:22 For I was ashamed to require of the king a band of soldiers and
horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way: because we had
spoken unto the king, saying, The hand of our God is upon all them for
good that seek him; but his power and his wrath is against all them
that forsake him. 8:23 So we fasted and besought our God for this: and he was intreated
of us. 8:24 Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests, Sherebiah,
Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them, 8:25 And weighed unto
them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, even the offering of
the house of our God, which the king, and his counsellors, and his
lords, and all Israel there present, had offered: 8:26 I even weighed
unto their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and silver
vessels an hundred talents, and of gold an hundred talents; 8:27 Also
twenty basons of gold, of a thousand drams; and two vessels of fine
copper, precious as gold. 8:28 And I said unto them, Ye are holy unto the LORD; the vessels are
holy also; and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering unto
the LORD God of your fathers. 8:29 Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them before the chief of
the priests and the Levites, and chief of the fathers of Israel, at
Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of the LORD. 8:30 So took the priests and the Levites the weight of the silver, and
the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem unto the house
of our God. 8:31 Then we departed from the river of Ahava on the twelfth day of
the first month, to go unto Jerusalem: and the hand of our God was
upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such
as lay in wait by the way. 8:32 And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days. 8:33 Now on the fourth day was the silver and the gold and the vessels
weighed in the house of our God by the hand of Meremoth the son of
Uriah the priest; and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; and
with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of
Binnui, Levites; 8:34 By number and by weight of every one: and all
the weight was written at that time. 8:35 Also the children of those that had been carried away, which were
come out of the captivity, offered burnt offerings unto the God of
Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety and six rams, seventy
and seven lambs, twelve he goats for a sin offering: all this was a
burnt offering unto the LORD. 8:36 And they delivered the king's commissions unto the king's
lieutenants, and to the governors on this side the river: and they
furthered the people, and the house of God. 9:1 Now when these things were done, the princes came to me, saying,
The people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not
separated themselves from the people of the lands, doing according to
their abominations, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the
Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians,
and the Amorites. 9:2 For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for
their sons: so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the
people of those lands: yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath
been chief in this trespass. 9:3 And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle, and
plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down
astonied. 9:4 Then were assembled unto me every one that trembled at the words
of the God of Israel, because of the transgression of those that had
been carried away; and I sat astonied until the evening sacrifice. 9:5 And at the evening sacrifice I arose up from my heaviness; and
having rent my garment and my mantle, I fell upon my knees, and spread
out my hands unto the LORD my God, 9:6 And said, O my God, I am
ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God: for our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up
unto the heavens. 9:7 Since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass
unto this day; and for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our
priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to
the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to confusion of face, as
it is this day. 9:8 And now for a little space grace hath been shewed from the LORD
our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his
holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little
reviving in our bondage. 9:9 For we were bondmen; yet our God hath not forsaken us in our
bondage, but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of
Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and to
repair the desolations thereof, and to give us a wall in Judah and in
Jerusalem. 9:10 And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? for we have
forsaken thy commandments, 9:11 Which thou hast commanded by thy
servants the prophets, saying, The land, unto which ye go to possess
it, is an unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the lands,
with their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another
with their uncleanness. 9:12 Now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, neither
take their daughters unto your sons, nor seek their peace or their
wealth for ever: that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land,
and leave it for an inheritance to your children for ever. 9:13 And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for
our great trespass, seeing that thou our God hast punished us less
than our iniquities deserve, and hast given us such deliverance as
this; 9:14 Should we again break thy commandments, and join in
affinity with the people of these abominations? wouldest not thou be
angry with us till thou hadst consumed us, so that there should be no
remnant nor escaping? 9:15 O LORD God of Israel, thou art righteous:
for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day: behold, we are before
thee in our trespasses: for we cannot stand before thee because of
this. 10:1 Now when Ezra had prayed, and when he had confessed, weeping and
casting himself down before the house of God, there assembled unto him
out of Israel a very great congregation of men and women and children:
for the people wept very sore. 10:2 And Shechaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam,
answered and said unto Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, and
have taken strange wives of the people of the land: yet now there is
hope in Israel concerning this thing. 10:3 Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all
the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of
my lord, and of those that tremble at the commandment of our God; and
let it be done according to the law. 10:4 Arise; for this matter belongeth unto thee: we also will be with
thee: be of good courage, and do it. 10:5 Then arose Ezra, and made the chief priests, the Levites, and all
Israel, to swear that they should do according to this word. And they
sware. 10:6 Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the
chamber of Johanan the son of Eliashib: and when he came thither, he
did eat no bread, nor drink water: for he mourned because of the
transgression of them that had been carried away. 10:7 And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem unto
all the children of the captivity, that they should gather themselves
together unto Jerusalem; 10:8 And that whosoever would not come within
three days, according to the counsel of the princes and the elders,
all his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the
congregation of those that had been carried away. 10:9 Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves
together unto Jerusalem within three days. It was the ninth month, on
the twentieth day of the month; and all the people sat in the street
of the house of God, trembling because of this matter, and for the
great rain. 10:10 And Ezra the priest stood up, and said unto them, Ye have
transgressed, and have taken strange wives, to increase the trespass
of Israel. 10:11 Now therefore make confession unto the LORD God of your fathers,
and do his pleasure: and separate yourselves from the people of the
land, and from the strange wives. 10:12 Then all the congregation answered and said with a loud voice,
As thou hast said, so must we do. 10:13 But the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we
are not able to stand without, neither is this a work of one day or
two: for we are many that have transgressed in this thing. 10:14 Let now our rulers of all the congregation stand, and let all
them which have taken strange wives in our cities come at appointed
times, and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof,
until the fierce wrath of our God for this matter be turned from us. 10:15 Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahaziah the son of Tikvah
were employed about this matter: and Meshullam and Shabbethai the
Levite helped them. 10:16 And the children of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest,
with certain chief of the fathers, after the house of their fathers,
and all of them by their names, were separated, and sat down in the
first day of the tenth month to examine the matter. 10:17 And they made an end with all the men that had taken strange
wives by the first day of the first month. 10:18 And among the sons of the priests there were found that had
taken strange wives: namely, of the sons of Jeshua the son of Jozadak,
and his brethren; Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah. 10:19 And they gave their hands that they would put away their wives;
and being guilty, they offered a ram of the flock for their trespass. 10:20 And of the sons of Immer; Hanani, and Zebadiah. 10:21 And of the sons of Harim; Maaseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah,
and Jehiel, and Uzziah. 10:22 And of the sons of Pashur; Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael,
Nethaneel, Jozabad, and Elasah. 10:23 Also of the Levites; Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah, (the same
is Kelita,) Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer. 10:24 Of the singers also; Eliashib: and of the porters; Shallum, and
Telem, and Uri. 10:25 Moreover of Israel: of the sons of Parosh; Ramiah, and Jeziah,
and Malchiah, and Miamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah. 10:26 And of the sons of Elam; Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and
Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Eliah. 10:27 And of the sons of Zattu; Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and
Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza. 10:28 Of the sons also of Bebai; Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, and
Athlai. 10:29 And of the sons of Bani; Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub,
and Sheal, and Ramoth. 10:30 And of the sons of Pahathmoab; Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah,
Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezaleel, and Binnui, and Manasseh. 10:31 And of the sons of Harim; Eliezer, Ishijah, Malchiah, Shemaiah,
Shimeon, 10:32 Benjamin, Malluch, and Shemariah. 10:33 Of the sons of Hashum; Mattenai, Mattathah, Zabad, Eliphelet,
Jeremai, Manasseh, and Shimei. 10:34 Of the sons of Bani; Maadai, Amram, and Uel, 10:35 Benaiah,
Bedeiah, Chelluh, 10:36 Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib, 10:37 Mattaniah,
Mattenai, and Jaasau, 10:38 And Bani, and Binnui, Shimei, 10:39 And
Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah, 10:40 Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
10:41 Azareel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah, 10:42 Shallum, Amariah, and
Joseph. 10:43 Of the sons of Nebo; Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Jadau,
and Joel, Benaiah. 10:44 All these had taken strange wives: and some of them had wives by
whom they had children. The Book of Nehemiah


1:1 The words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah. And it came to pass
in the month Chisleu, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the
palace, 1:2 That Hanani, one of my brethren, came, he and certain men
of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which
were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem. 1:3 And they said unto me, The remnant that are left of the captivity
there in the province are in great affliction and reproach: the wall
of Jerusalem also is broken down, and the gates thereof are burned
with fire. 1:4 And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and
wept, and mourned certain days, and fasted, and prayed before the God
of heaven, 1:5 And said, I beseech thee, O LORD God of heaven, the
great and terrible God, that keepeth covenant and mercy for them that
love him and observe his commandments: 1:6 Let thine ear now be
attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou mayest hear the prayer of
thy servant, which I pray before thee now, day and night, for the
children of Israel thy servants, and confess the sins of the children
of Israel, which we have sinned against thee: both I and my father's
house have sinned. 1:7 We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the
commandments, nor the statutes, nor the judgments, which thou
commandedst thy servant Moses. 1:8 Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commandedst thy
servant Moses, saying, If ye transgress, I will scatter you abroad
among the nations: 1:9 But if ye turn unto me, and keep my
commandments, and do them; though there were of you cast out unto the
uttermost part of the heaven, yet will I gather them from thence, and
will bring them unto the place that I have chosen to set my name
there. 1:10 Now these are thy servants and thy people, whom thou hast
redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand. 1:11 O LORD, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the
prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who desire
to fear thy name: and prosper, I pray thee, thy servant this day, and
grant him mercy in the sight of this man. For I was the king's
cupbearer. 2:1 And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of
Artaxerxes the king, that wine was before him: and I took up the wine,
and gave it unto the king. Now I had not been beforetime sad in his
presence. 2:2 Wherefore the king said unto me, Why is thy countenance sad,
seeing thou art not sick? this is nothing else but sorrow of heart. Then I was very sore afraid, 2:3 And said unto the king, Let the king
live for ever: why should not my countenance be sad, when the city,
the place of my fathers' sepulchres, lieth waste, and the gates
thereof are consumed with fire? 2:4 Then the king said unto me, For
what dost thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven. 2:5 And I said unto the king, If it please the king, and if thy
servant have found favour in thy sight, that thou wouldest send me
unto Judah, unto the city of my fathers' sepulchres, that I may build
it. 2:6 And the king said unto me, (the queen also sitting by him,) For
how long shall thy journey be? and when wilt thou return? So it
pleased the king to send me; and I set him a time. 2:7 Moreover I said unto the king, If it please the king, let letters
be given me to the governors beyond the river, that they may convey me
over till I come into Judah; 2:8 And a letter unto Asaph the keeper of
the king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the
gates of the palace which appertained to the house, and for the wall
of the city, and for the house that I shall enter into. And the king
granted me, according to the good hand of my God upon me. 2:9 Then I came to the governors beyond the river, and gave them the
king's letters. Now the king had sent captains of the army and
horsemen with me. 2:10 When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the
Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that there was come
a man to seek the welfare of the children of Israel. 2:11 So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days. 2:12 And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; neither
told I any man what my God had put in my heart to do at Jerusalem:
neither was there any beast with me, save the beast that I rode upon. 2:13 And I went out by night by the gate of the valley, even before
the dragon well, and to the dung port, and viewed the walls of
Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates thereof were consumed
with fire. 2:14 Then I went on to the gate of the fountain, and to the king's
pool: but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass. 2:15 Then went I up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall,
and turned back, and entered by the gate of the valley, and so
returned. 2:16 And the rulers knew not whither I went, or what I did; neither
had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the
nobles, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest that did the work. 2:17 Then said I unto them, Ye see the distress that we are in, how
Jerusalem lieth waste, and the gates thereof are burned with fire:
come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem, that we be no more a
reproach. 2:18 Then I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me; as
also the king's words that he had spoken unto me. And they said, Let
us rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for this good
work. 2:19 But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the
Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn,
and despised us, and said, What is this thing that ye do? will ye
rebel against the king? 2:20 Then answered I them, and said unto
them, The God of heaven, he will prosper us; therefore we his servants
will arise and build: but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial,
in Jerusalem. 3:1 Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the
priests, and they builded the sheep gate; they sanctified it, and set
up the doors of it; even unto the tower of Meah they sanctified it,
unto the tower of Hananeel. 3:2 And next unto him builded the men of Jericho. And next to them
builded Zaccur the son of Imri. 3:3 But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build, who also laid
the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof,
and the bars thereof. 3:4 And next unto them repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah, the son of
Koz. And next unto them repaired Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the
son of Meshezabeel. And next unto them repaired Zadok the son of
Baana. 3:5 And next unto them the Tekoites repaired; but their nobles put not
their necks to the work of their LORD. 3:6 Moreover the old gate repaired Jehoiada the son of Paseah, and
Meshullam the son of Besodeiah; they laid the beams thereof, and set
up the doors thereof, and the locks thereof, and the bars thereof. 3:7 And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the
Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, unto the throne of the
governor on this side the river. 3:8 Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, of the
goldsmiths. Next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of one of the
apothecaries, and they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall. 3:9 And next unto them repaired Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of
the half part of Jerusalem. 3:10 And next unto them repaired Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, even
over against his house. And next unto him repaired Hattush the son of
Hashabniah. 3:11 Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hashub the son of Pahathmoab,
repaired the other piece, and the tower of the furnaces. 3:12 And next unto him repaired Shallum the son of Halohesh, the ruler
of the half part of Jerusalem, he and his daughters. 3:13 The valley gate repaired Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah;
they built it, and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and
the bars thereof, and a thousand cubits on the wall unto the dung
gate. 3:14 But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab, the ruler
of part of Bethhaccerem; he built it, and set up the doors thereof,
the locks thereof, and the bars thereof. 3:15 But the gate of the fountain repaired Shallun the son of
Colhozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; he built it, and covered it,
and set up the doors thereof, the locks thereof, and the bars thereof,
and the wall of the pool of Siloah by the king's garden, and unto the
stairs that go down from the city of David. 3:16 After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the
half part of Bethzur, unto the place over against the sepulchres of
David, and to the pool that was made, and unto the house of the
mighty. 3:17 After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani. Next unto
him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of Keilah, in his
part. 3:18 After him repaired their brethren, Bavai the son of Henadad, the
ruler of the half part of Keilah. 3:19 And next to him repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of
Mizpah, another piece over against the going up to the armoury at the
turning of the wall. 3:20 After him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired the other
piece, from the turning of the wall unto the door of the house of
Eliashib the high priest. 3:21 After him repaired Meremoth the son of Urijah the son of Koz
another piece, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end
of the house of Eliashib. 3:22 And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain. 3:23 After him repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their house. After him repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah by
his house. 3:24 After him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad another piece, from
the house of Azariah unto the turning of the wall, even unto the
corner. 3:25 Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall, and
the tower which lieth out from the king's high house, that was by the
court of the prison. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh. 3:26 Moreover the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel, unto the place over
against the water gate toward the east, and the tower that lieth out. 3:27 After them the Tekoites repaired another piece, over against the
great tower that lieth out, even unto the wall of Ophel. 3:28 From above the horse gate repaired the priests, every one over
against his house. 3:29 After them repaired Zadok the son of Immer over against his
house. After him repaired also Shemaiah the son of Shechaniah, the keeper of
the east gate. 3:30 After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the
sixth son of Zalaph, another piece. After him repaired Meshullam the
son of Berechiah over against his chamber. 3:31 After him repaired Malchiah the goldsmith's son unto the place of
the Nethinims, and of the merchants, over against the gate Miphkad,
and to the going up of the corner. 3:32 And between the going up of the corner unto the sheep gate
repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants. 4:1 But it came to pass, that when Sanballat heard that we builded the
wall, he was wroth, and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews. 4:2 And he spake before his brethren and the army of Samaria, and
said, What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify themselves? will
they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? will they revive the
stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are burned? 4:3 Now
Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, Even that which they
build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall. 4:4 Hear, O our God; for we are despised: and turn their reproach upon
their own head, and give them for a prey in the land of captivity: 4:5
And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out
from before thee: for they have provoked thee to anger before the
builders. 4:6 So built we the wall; and all the wall was joined together unto
the half thereof: for the people had a mind to work. 4:7 But it came to pass, that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the
Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the walls
of Jerusalem were made up, and that the breaches began to be stopped,
then they were very wroth, 4:8 And conspired all of them together to
come and to fight against Jerusalem, and to hinder it. 4:9 Nevertheless we made our prayer unto our God, and set a watch
against them day and night, because of them. 4:10 And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens is
decayed, and there is much rubbish; so that we are not able to build
the wall. 4:11 And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till
we come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to
cease. 4:12 And it came to pass, that when the Jews which dwelt by them came,
they said unto us ten times, From all places whence ye shall return
unto us they will be upon you. 4:13 Therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall, and on the
higher places, I even set the people after their families with their
swords, their spears, and their bows. 4:14 And I looked, and rose up, and said unto the nobles, and to the
rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them:
remember the LORD, which is great and terrible, and fight for your
brethren, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses. 4:15 And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known
unto us, and God had brought their counsel to nought, that we returned
all of us to the wall, every one unto his work. 4:16 And it came to pass from that time forth, that the half of my
servants wrought in the work, and the other half of them held both the
spears, the shields, and the bows, and the habergeons; and the rulers
were behind all the house of Judah. 4:17 They which builded on the wall, and they that bare burdens, with
those that laded, every one with one of his hands wrought in the work,
and with the other hand held a weapon. 4:18 For the builders, every one had his sword girded by his side, and
so builded. And he that sounded the trumpet was by me. 4:19 And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of
the people, The work is great and large, and we are separated upon the
wall, one far from another. 4:20 In what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet, resort
ye thither unto us: our God shall fight for us. 4:21 So we laboured in the work: and half of them held the spears from
the rising of the morning till the stars appeared. 4:22 Likewise at the same time said I unto the people, Let every one
with his servant lodge within Jerusalem, that in the night they may be
a guard to us, and labour on the day. 4:23 So neither I, nor my brethren, nor my servants, nor the men of
the guard which followed me, none of us put off our clothes, saving
that every one put them off for washing. 5:1 And there was a great cry of the people and of their wives against
their brethren the Jews. 5:2 For there were that said, We, our sons, and our daughters, are
many: therefore we take up corn for them, that we may eat, and live. 5:3 Some also there were that said, We have mortgaged our lands,
vineyards, and houses, that we might buy corn, because of the dearth. 5:4 There were also that said, We have borrowed money for the king's
tribute, and that upon our lands and vineyards. 5:5 Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, our children as
their children: and, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our
daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are brought unto
bondage already: neither is it in our power to redeem them; for other
men have our lands and vineyards. 5:6 And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words. 5:7 Then I consulted with myself, and I rebuked the nobles, and the
rulers, and said unto them, Ye exact usury, every one of his brother. And I set a great assembly against them. 5:8 And I said unto them, We after our ability have redeemed our
brethren the Jews, which were sold unto the heathen; and will ye even
sell your brethren? or shall they be sold unto us? Then held they
their peace, and found nothing to answer. 5:9 Also I said, It is not good that ye do: ought ye not to walk in
the fear of our God because of the reproach of the heathen our
enemies? 5:10 I likewise, and my brethren, and my servants, might
exact of them money and corn: I pray you, let us leave off this usury. 5:11 Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their lands, their
vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth part
of the money, and of the corn, the wine, and the oil, that ye exact of
them. 5:12 Then said they, We will restore them, and will require nothing of
them; so will we do as thou sayest. Then I called the priests, and
took an oath of them, that they should do according to this promise. 5:13 Also I shook my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from
his house, and from his labour, that performeth not this promise, even
thus be he shaken out, and emptied. And all the congregation said,
Amen, and praised the LORD. And the people did according to this
promise. 5:14 Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor
in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the two and
thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my
brethren have not eaten the bread of the governor. 5:15 But the former governors that had been before me were chargeable
unto the people, and had taken of them bread and wine, beside forty
shekels of silver; yea, even their servants bare rule over the people:
but so did not I, because of the fear of God. 5:16 Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither bought we
any land: and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work. 5:17 Moreover there were at my table an hundred and fifty of the Jews
and rulers, beside those that came unto us from among the heathen that
are about us. 5:18 Now that which was prepared for me daily was one ox and six
choice sheep; also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days
store of all sorts of wine: yet for all this required not I the bread
of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people. 5:19 Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have
done for this people. 6:1 Now it came to pass when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and Geshem the
Arabian, and the rest of our enemies, heard that I had builded the
wall, and that there was no breach left therein; (though at that time
I had not set up the doors upon the gates;) 6:2 That Sanballat and
Geshem sent unto me, saying, Come, let us meet together in some one of
the villages in the plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief. 6:3 And I sent messengers unto them, saying, I am doing a great work,
so that I cannot come down: why should the work cease, whilst I leave
it, and come down to you? 6:4 Yet they sent unto me four times after
this sort; and I answered them after the same manner. 6:5 Then sent Sanballat his servant unto me in like manner the fifth
time with an open letter in his hand; 6:6 Wherein was written, It is
reported among the heathen, and Gashmu saith it, that thou and the
Jews think to rebel: for which cause thou buildest the wall, that thou
mayest be their king, according to these words. 6:7 And thou hast also appointed prophets to preach of thee at
Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in Judah: and now shall it be
reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and
let us take counsel together. 6:8 Then I sent unto him, saying, There are no such things done as
thou sayest, but thou feignest them out of thine own heart. 6:9 For they all made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened
from the work, that it be not done. Now therefore, O God, strengthen
my hands. 6:10 Afterward I came unto the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah
the son of Mehetabeel, who was shut up; and he said, Let us meet
together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the
doors of the temple: for they will come to slay thee; yea, in the
night will they come to slay thee. 6:11 And I said, Should such a man as I flee? and who is there, that,
being as I am, would go into the temple to save his life? I will not
go in. 6:12 And, lo, I perceived that God had not sent him; but that he
pronounced this prophecy against me: for Tobiah and Sanballat had
hired him. 6:13 Therefore was he hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and
sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they
might reproach me. 6:14 My God, think thou upon Tobiah and Sanballat according to these
their works, and on the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the
prophets, that would have put me in fear. 6:15 So the wall was finished in the twenty and fifth day of the month
Elul, in fifty and two days. 6:16 And it came to pass, that when all our enemies heard thereof, and
all the heathen that were about us saw these things, they were much
cast down in their own eyes: for they perceived that this work was
wrought of our God. 6:17 Moreover in those days the nobles of Judah sent many letters unto
Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah came unto them. 6:18 For there were many in Judah sworn unto him, because he was the
son in law of Shechaniah the son of Arah; and his son Johanan had
taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah. 6:19 Also they reported his good deeds before me, and uttered my words
to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear. 7:1 Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the
doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,
7:2 That I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the ruler of the
palace, charge over Jerusalem: for he was a faithful man, and feared
God above many. 7:3 And I said unto them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened
until the sun be hot; and while they stand by, let them shut the
doors, and bar them: and appoint watches of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, every one in his watch, and every one to be over against
his house. 7:4 Now the city was large and great: but the people were few therein,
and the houses were not builded. 7:5 And my God put into mine heart to gather together the nobles, and
the rulers, and the people, that they might be reckoned by genealogy. And I found a register of the genealogy of them which came up at the
first, and found written therein, 7:6 These are the children of the
province, that went up out of the captivity, of those that had been
carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried
away, and came again to Jerusalem and to Judah, every one unto his
city; 7:7 Who came with Zerubbabel, Jeshua, Nehemiah, Azariah,
Raamiah, Nahamani, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispereth, Bigvai, Nehum,
Baanah. The number, I say, of the men of the people of Israel was
this; 7:8 The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy and
two. 7:9 The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two. 7:10 The children of Arah, six hundred fifty and two. 7:11 The children of Pahathmoab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab,
two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen. 7:12 The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. 7:13 The children of Zattu, eight hundred forty and five. 7:14 The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore. 7:15 The children of Binnui, six hundred forty and eight. 7:16 The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and eight. 7:17 The children of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty and two. 7:18 The children of Adonikam, six hundred threescore and seven. 7:19 The children of Bigvai, two thousand threescore and seven. 7:20 The children of Adin, six hundred fifty and five. 7:21 The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight. 7:22 The children of Hashum, three hundred twenty and eight. 7:23 The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and four. 7:24 The children of Hariph, an hundred and twelve. 7:25 The children of Gibeon, ninety and five. 7:26 The men of Bethlehem and Netophah, an hundred fourscore and
eight. 7:27 The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight. 7:28 The men of Bethazmaveth, forty and two. 7:29 The men of Kirjathjearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred
forty and three. 7:30 The men of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one. 7:31 The men of Michmas, an hundred and twenty and two. 7:32 The men of Bethel and Ai, an hundred twenty and three. 7:33 The men of the other Nebo, fifty and two. 7:34 The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and
four. 7:35 The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty. 7:36 The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five. 7:37 The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and
one. 7:38 The children of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty. 7:39 The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua,
nine hundred seventy and three. 7:40 The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two. 7:41 The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven. 7:42 The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen. 7:43 The Levites: the children of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, and of the
children of Hodevah, seventy and four. 7:44 The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred forty and eight. 7:45 The porters: the children of Shallum, the children of Ater, the
children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the children of Hatita, the
children of Shobai, an hundred thirty and eight. 7:46 The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hashupha,
the children of Tabbaoth, 7:47 The children of Keros, the children of
Sia, the children of Padon, 7:48 The children of Lebana, the children
of Hagaba, the children of Shalmai, 7:49 The children of Hanan, the
children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, 7:50 The children of
Reaiah, the children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, 7:51 The
children of Gazzam, the children of Uzza, the children of Phaseah,
7:52 The children of Besai, the children of Meunim, the children of
Nephishesim, 7:53 The children of Bakbuk, the children of Hakupha, the
children of Harhur, 7:54 The children of Bazlith, the children of
Mehida, the children of Harsha, 7:55 The children of Barkos, the
children of Sisera, the children of Tamah, 7:56 The children of
Neziah, the children of Hatipha. 7:57 The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the
children of Sophereth, the children of Perida, 7:58 The children of
Jaala, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel, 7:59 The
children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of
Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Amon. 7:60 All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants, were
three hundred ninety and two. 7:61 And these were they which went up also from Telmelah, Telharesha,
Cherub, Addon, and Immer: but they could not shew their father's
house, nor their seed, whether they were of Israel. 7:62 The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of
Nekoda, six hundred forty and two. 7:63 And of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz,
the children of Barzillai, which took one of the daughters of
Barzillai the Gileadite to wife, and was called after their name. 7:64 These sought their register among those that were reckoned by
genealogy, but it was not found: therefore were they, as polluted, put
from the priesthood. 7:65 And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the
most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim. 7:66 The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three
hundred and threescore, 7:67 Beside their manservants and their
maidservants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty
and seven: and they had two hundred forty and five singing men and
singing women. 7:68 Their horses, seven hundred thirty and six: their mules, two
hundred forty and five: 7:69 Their camels, four hundred thirty and
five: six thousand seven hundred and twenty asses. 7:70 And some of the chief of the fathers gave unto the work. The
Tirshatha gave to the treasure a thousand drams of gold, fifty basons,
five hundred and thirty priests' garments. 7:71 And some of the chief of the fathers gave to the treasure of the
work twenty thousand drams of gold, and two thousand and two hundred
pound of silver. 7:72 And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand
drams of gold, and two thousand pound of silver, and threescore and
seven priests' garments. 7:73 So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the
singers, and some of the people, and the Nethinims, and all Israel,
dwelt in their cities; and when the seventh month came, the children
of Israel were in their cities. 8:1 And all the people gathered themselves together as one man into
the street that was before the water gate; and they spake unto Ezra
the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which the LORD had
commanded to Israel. 8:2 And Ezra the priest brought the law before the congregation both
of men and women, and all that could hear with understanding, upon the
first day of the seventh month. 8:3 And he read therein before the street that was before the water
gate from the morning until midday, before the men and the women, and
those that could understand; and the ears of all the people were
attentive unto the book of the law. 8:4 And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had
made for the purpose; and beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and
Anaiah, and Urijah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand; and
on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchiah, and Hashum, and
Hashbadana, Zechariah, and Meshullam. 8:5 And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people; (for he
was above all the people;) and when he opened it, all the people stood
up: 8:6 And Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God. And all the people
answered, Amen, Amen, with lifting up their hands: and they bowed
their heads, and worshipped the LORD with their faces to the ground. 8:7 Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai,
Hodijah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the
Levites, caused the people to understand the law: and the people stood
in their place. 8:8 So they read in the book in the law of God distinctly, and gave
the sense, and caused them to understand the reading. 8:9 And Nehemiah, which is the Tirshatha, and Ezra the priest the
scribe, and the Levites that taught the people, said unto all the
people, This day is holy unto the LORD your God; mourn not, nor weep. For all the people wept, when they heard the words of the law. 8:10 Then he said unto them, Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the
sweet, and send portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared: for
this day is holy unto our LORD: neither be ye sorry; for the joy of
the LORD is your strength. 8:11 So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace,
for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved. 8:12 And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to
send portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understood
the words that were declared unto them. 8:13 And on the second day were gathered together the chief of the
fathers of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, unto Ezra the
scribe, even to understand the words of the law. 8:14 And they found written in the law which the LORD had commanded by
Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast
of the seventh month: 8:15 And that they should publish and proclaim
in all their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth unto the
mount, and fetch olive branches, and pine branches, and myrtle
branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make
booths, as it is written. 8:16 So the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves
booths, every one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, and
in the courts of the house of God, and in the street of the water
gate, and in the street of the gate of Ephraim. 8:17 And all the congregation of them that were come again out of the
captivity made booths, and sat under the booths: for since the days of
Jeshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the children of Israel
done so. And there was very great gladness. 8:18 Also day by day, from the first day unto the last day, he read in
the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven days; and on
the eighth day was a solemn assembly, according unto the manner. 9:1 Now in the twenty and fourth day of this month the children of
Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackclothes, and earth
upon them. 9:2 And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers,
and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their
fathers. 9:3 And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law
of the LORD their God one fourth part of the day; and another fourth
part they confessed, and worshipped the LORD their God. 9:4 Then stood up upon the stairs, of the Levites, Jeshua, and Bani,
Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, and cried
with a loud voice unto the LORD their God. 9:5 Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabniah,
Sherebiah, Hodijah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, Stand up and bless
the LORD your God for ever and ever: and blessed be thy glorious name,
which is exalted above all blessing and praise. 9:6 Thou, even thou, art LORD alone; thou hast made heaven, the heaven
of heavens, with all their host, the earth, and all things that are
therein, the seas, and all that is therein, and thou preservest them
all; and the host of heaven worshippeth thee. 9:7 Thou art the LORD the God, who didst choose Abram, and broughtest
him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of
Abraham; 9:8 And foundest his heart faithful before thee, and madest a
covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanites, the Hittites,
the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Jebusites, and the
Girgashites, to give it, I say, to his seed, and hast performed thy
words; for thou art righteous: 9:9 And didst see the affliction of our
fathers in Egypt, and heardest their cry by the Red sea; 9:10 And
shewedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and
on all the people of his land: for thou knewest that they dealt
proudly against them. So didst thou get thee a name, as it is this
day. 9:11 And thou didst divide the sea before them, so that they went
through the midst of the sea on the dry land; and their persecutors
thou threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighty waters. 9:12 Moreover thou leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar; and in
the night by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein
they should go. 9:13 Thou camest down also upon mount Sinai, and spakest with them
from heaven, and gavest them right judgments, and true laws, good
statutes and commandments: 9:14 And madest known unto them thy holy
sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the
hand of Moses thy servant: 9:15 And gavest them bread from heaven for
their hunger, and broughtest forth water for them out of the rock for
their thirst, and promisedst them that they should go in to possess
the land which thou hadst sworn to give them. 9:16 But they and our fathers dealt proudly, and hardened their necks,
and hearkened not to thy commandments, 9:17 And refused to obey,
neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou didst among them; but
hardened their necks, and in their rebellion appointed a captain to
return to their bondage: but thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious
and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and forsookest
them not. 9:18 Yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said, This is thy
God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and had wrought great
provocations; 9:19 Yet thou in thy manifold mercies forsookest them
not in the wilderness: the pillar of the cloud departed not from them
by day, to lead them in the way; neither the pillar of fire by night,
to shew them light, and the way wherein they should go. 9:20 Thou gavest also thy good spirit to instruct them, and
withheldest not thy manna from their mouth, and gavest them water for
their thirst. 9:21 Yea, forty years didst thou sustain them in the wilderness, so
that they lacked nothing; their clothes waxed not old, and their feet
swelled not. 9:22 Moreover thou gavest them kingdoms and nations, and didst divide
them into corners: so they possessed the land of Sihon, and the land
of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan. 9:23 Their children also multipliedst thou as the stars of heaven, and
broughtest them into the land, concerning which thou hadst promised to
their fathers, that they should go in to possess it. 9:24 So the children went in and possessed the land, and thou
subduedst before them the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, and
gavest them into their hands, with their kings, and the people of the
land, that they might do with them as they would. 9:25 And they took strong cities, and a fat land, and possessed houses
full of all goods, wells digged, vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit
trees in abundance: so they did eat, and were filled, and became fat,
and delighted themselves in thy great goodness. 9:26 Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee,
and cast thy law behind their backs, and slew thy prophets which
testified against them to turn them to thee, and they wrought great
provocations. 9:27 Therefore thou deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies,
who vexed them: and in the time of their trouble, when they cried unto
thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and according to thy manifold
mercies thou gavest them saviours, who saved them out of the hand of
their enemies. 9:28 But after they had rest, they did evil again before thee:
therefore leftest thou them in the land of their enemies, so that they
had the dominion over them: yet when they returned, and cried unto
thee, thou heardest them from heaven; and many times didst thou
deliver them according to thy mercies; 9:29 And testifiedst against
them, that thou mightest bring them again unto thy law: yet they dealt
proudly, and hearkened not unto thy commandments, but sinned against
thy judgments, (which if a man do, he shall live in them;) and
withdrew the shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear. 9:30 Yet many years didst thou forbear them, and testifiedst against
them by thy spirit in thy prophets: yet would they not give ear:
therefore gavest thou them into the hand of the people of the lands. 9:31 Nevertheless for thy great mercies' sake thou didst not utterly
consume them, nor forsake them; for thou art a gracious and merciful
God. 9:32 Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible
God, who keepest covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem
little before thee, that hath come upon us, on our kings, on our
princes, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers,
and on all thy people, since the time of the kings of Assyria unto
this day. 9:33 Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us; for thou
hast done right, but we have done wickedly: 9:34 Neither have our
kings, our princes, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, nor
hearkened unto thy commandments and thy testimonies, wherewith thou
didst testify against them. 9:35 For they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great
goodness that thou gavest them, and in the large and fat land which
thou gavest before them, neither turned they from their wicked works. 9:36 Behold, we are servants this day, and for the land that thou
gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof and the good thereof,
behold, we are servants in it: 9:37 And it yieldeth much increase unto
the kings whom thou hast set over us because of our sins: also they
have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure,
and we are in great distress. 9:38 And because of all this we make a sure covenant, and write it;
and our princes, Levites, and priests, seal unto it. 10:1 Now those that sealed were, Nehemiah, the Tirshatha, the son of
Hachaliah, and Zidkijah, 10:2 Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah, 10:3 Pashur,
Amariah, Malchijah, 10:4 Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch, 10:5 Harim,
Meremoth, Obadiah, 10:6 Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch, 10:7 Meshullam,
Abijah, Mijamin, 10:8 Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah: these were the
priests. 10:9 And the Levites: both Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the
sons of Henadad, Kadmiel; 10:10 And their brethren, Shebaniah,
Hodijah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan, 10:11 Micha, Rehob, Hashabiah, 10:12
Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah, 10:13 Hodijah, Bani, Beninu. 10:14 The chief of the people; Parosh, Pahathmoab, Elam, Zatthu, Bani,
10:15 Bunni, Azgad, Bebai, 10:16 Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin, 10:17 Ater,
Hizkijah, Azzur, 10:18 Hodijah, Hashum, Bezai, 10:19 Hariph, Anathoth,
Nebai, 10:20 Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir, 10:21 Meshezabeel, Zadok,
Jaddua, 10:22 Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah, 10:23 Hoshea, Hananiah, Hashub,
10:24 Hallohesh, Pileha, Shobek, 10:25 Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
10:26 And Ahijah, Hanan, Anan, 10:27 Malluch, Harim, Baanah. 10:28 And the rest of the people, the priests, the Levites, the
porters, the singers, the Nethinims, and all they that had separated
themselves from the people of the lands unto the law of God, their
wives, their sons, and their daughters, every one having knowledge,
and having understanding; 10:29 They clave to their brethren, their
nobles, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God's
law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and
do all the commandments of the LORD our Lord, and his judgments and
his statutes; 10:30 And that we would not give our daughters unto the
people of the land, not take their daughters for our sons: 10:31 And
if the people of the land bring ware or any victuals on the sabbath
day to sell, that we would not buy it of them on the sabbath, or on
the holy day: and that we would leave the seventh year, and the
exaction of every debt. 10:32 Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with
the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God;
10:33 For the shewbread, and for the continual meat offering, and for
the continual burnt offering, of the sabbaths, of the new moons, for
the set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin offerings to
make an atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our
God. 10:34 And we cast the lots among the priests, the Levites, and the
people, for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our God,
after the houses of our fathers, at times appointed year by year, to
burn upon the altar of the LORD our God, as it is written in the law:
10:35 And to bring the firstfruits of our ground, and the firstfruits
of all fruit of all trees, year by year, unto the house of the LORD:
10:36 Also the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is
written in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks,
to bring to the house of our God, unto the priests that minister in
the house of our God: 10:37 And that we should bring the firstfruits
of our dough, and our offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees,
of wine and of oil, unto the priests, to the chambers of the house of
our God; and the tithes of our ground unto the Levites, that the same
Levites might have the tithes in all the cities of our tillage. 10:38 And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites, when
the Levites take tithes: and the Levites shall bring up the tithe of
the tithes unto the house of our God, to the chambers, into the
treasure house. 10:39 For the children of Israel and the children of Levi shall bring
the offering of the corn, of the new wine, and the oil, unto the
chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that
minister, and the porters, and the singers: and we will not forsake
the house of our God. 11:1 And the rulers of the people dwelt at Jerusalem: the rest of the
people also cast lots, to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the
holy city, and nine parts to dwell in other cities. 11:2 And the people blessed all the men, that willingly offered
themselves to dwell at Jerusalem. 11:3 Now these are the chief of the province that dwelt in Jerusalem:
but in the cities of Judah dwelt every one in his possession in their
cities, to wit, Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the
Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants. 11:4 And at Jerusalem dwelt certain of the children of Judah, and of
the children of Benjamin. Of the children of Judah; Athaiah the son of
Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of
Shephatiah, the son of Mahalaleel, of the children of Perez; 11:5 And
Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Colhozeh, the son of Hazaiah,
the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son
of Shiloni. 11:6 All the sons of Perez that dwelt at Jerusalem were four hundred
threescore and eight valiant men. 11:7 And these are the sons of Benjamin; Sallu the son of Meshullam,
the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of
Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jesaiah. 11:8 And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty and eight. 11:9 And Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer: and Judah the son
of Senuah was second over the city. 11:10 Of the priests: Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin. 11:11 Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of
Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, was the ruler of the
house of God. 11:12 And their brethren that did the work of the house were eight
hundred twenty and two: and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of
Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashur,
the son of Malchiah. 11:13 And his brethren, chief of the fathers, two hundred forty and
two: and Amashai the son of Azareel, the son of Ahasai, the son of
Meshillemoth, the son of Immer, 11:14 And their brethren, mighty men
of valour, an hundred twenty and eight: and their overseer was
Zabdiel, the son of one of the great men. 11:15 Also of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hashub, the son of
Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni; 11:16 And Shabbethai
and Jozabad, of the chief of the Levites, had the oversight of the
outward business of the house of God. 11:17 And Mattaniah the son of Micha, the son of Zabdi, the son of
Asaph, was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in prayer: and
Bakbukiah the second among his brethren, and Abda the son of Shammua,
the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun. 11:18 All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred fourscore and
four. 11:19 Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their brethren that
kept the gates, were an hundred seventy and two. 11:20 And the residue of Israel, of the priests, and the Levites, were
in all the cities of Judah, every one in his inheritance. 11:21 But the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and Ziha and Gispa were over
the Nethinims. 11:22 The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son
of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micha. Of the sons of Asaph, the singers were over the business of the house
of God. 11:23 For it was the king's commandment concerning them, that a
certain portion should be for the singers, due for every day. 11:24 And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabeel, of the children of Zerah
the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the
people. 11:25 And for the villages, with their fields, some of the children of
Judah dwelt at Kirjatharba, and in the villages thereof, and at Dibon,
and in the villages thereof, and at Jekabzeel, and in the villages
thereof, 11:26 And at Jeshua, and at Moladah, and at Bethphelet, 11:27
And at Hazarshual, and at Beersheba, and in the villages thereof,
11:28 And at Ziklag, and at Mekonah, and in the villages thereof,
11:29 And at Enrimmon, and at Zareah, and at Jarmuth, 11:30 Zanoah,
Adullam, and in their villages, at Lachish, and the fields thereof, at
Azekah, and in the villages thereof. And they dwelt from Beersheba
unto the valley of Hinnom. 11:31 The children also of Benjamin from Geba dwelt at Michmash, and
Aija, and Bethel, and in their villages. 11:32 And at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah, 11:33 Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
11:34 Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat, 11:35 Lod, and Ono, the valley of
craftsmen. 11:36 And of the Levites were divisions in Judah, and in Benjamin. 12:1 Now these are the priests and the Levites that went up with
Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua: Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
12:2 Amariah, Malluch, Hattush, 12:3 Shechaniah, Rehum, Meremoth, 12:4
Iddo, Ginnetho, Abijah, 12:5 Miamin, Maadiah, Bilgah, 12:6 Shemaiah,
and Joiarib, Jedaiah, 12:7 Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were
the chief of the priests and of their brethren in the days of Jeshua. 12:8 Moreover the Levites: Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah,
and Mattaniah, which was over the thanksgiving, he and his brethren. 12:9 Also Bakbukiah and Unni, their brethren, were over against them
in the watches. 12:10 And Jeshua begat Joiakim, Joiakim also begat Eliashib, and
Eliashib begat Joiada, 12:11 And Joiada begat Jonathan, and Jonathan
begat Jaddua. 12:12 And in the days of Joiakim were priests, the chief of the
fathers: of Seraiah, Meraiah; of Jeremiah, Hananiah; 12:13 Of Ezra,
Meshullam; of Amariah, Jehohanan; 12:14 Of Melicu, Jonathan; of
Shebaniah, Joseph; 12:15 Of Harim, Adna; of Meraioth, Helkai; 12:16 Of
Iddo, Zechariah; of Ginnethon, Meshullam; 12:17 Of Abijah, Zichri; of
Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai: 12:18 Of Bilgah, Shammua; of Shemaiah,
Jehonathan; 12:19 And of Joiarib, Mattenai; of Jedaiah, Uzzi; 12:20 Of
Sallai, Kallai; of Amok, Eber; 12:21 Of Hilkiah, Hashabiah; of
Jedaiah, Nethaneel. 12:22 The Levites in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and
Jaddua, were recorded chief of the fathers: also the priests, to the
reign of Darius the Persian. 12:23 The sons of Levi, the chief of the fathers, were written in the
book of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of
Eliashib. 12:24 And the chief of the Levites: Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua
the son of Kadmiel, with their brethren over against them, to praise
and to give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of
God, ward over against ward. 12:25 Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub,
were porters keeping the ward at the thresholds of the gates. 12:26 These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of
Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the
priest, the scribe. 12:27 And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the
Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem, to keep
the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgivings, and with
singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps. 12:28 And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both
out of the plain country round about Jerusalem, and from the villages
of Netophathi; 12:29 Also from the house of Gilgal, and out of the
fields of Geba and Azmaveth: for the singers had builded them villages
round about Jerusalem. 12:30 And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and
purified the people, and the gates, and the wall. 12:31 Then I brought up the princes of Judah upon the wall, and
appointed two great companies of them that gave thanks, whereof one
went on the right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate: 12:32 And
after them went Hoshaiah, and half of the princes of Judah, 12:33 And
Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam, 12:34 Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah,
and Jeremiah, 12:35 And certain of the priests' sons with trumpets;
namely, Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of
Mattaniah, the son of Michaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph:
12:36 And his brethren, Shemaiah, and Azarael, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai,
Nethaneel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David
the man of God, and Ezra the scribe before them. 12:37 And at the fountain gate, which was over against them, they went
up by the stairs of the city of David, at the going up of the wall,
above the house of David, even unto the water gate eastward. 12:38 And the other company of them that gave thanks went over against
them, and I after them, and the half of the people upon the wall, from
beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall; 12:39 And
from above the gate of Ephraim, and above the old gate, and above the
fish gate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Meah, even unto
the sheep gate: and they stood still in the prison gate. 12:40 So stood the two companies of them that gave thanks in the house
of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with me: 12:41 And the
priests; Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Michaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah,
and Hananiah, with trumpets; 12:42 And Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and
Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer. 12:43 Also that day they offered great sacrifices, and rejoiced: for
God had made them rejoice with great joy: the wives also and the
children rejoiced: so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar
off. 12:44 And at that time were some appointed over the chambers for the
treasures, for the offerings, for the firstfruits, and for the tithes,
to gather into them out of the fields of the cities the portions of
the law for the priests and Levites: for Judah rejoiced for the
priests and for the Levites that waited. 12:45 And both the singers and the porters kept the ward of their God,
and the ward of the purification, according to the commandment of
David, and of Solomon his son. 12:46 For in the days of David and Asaph of old there were chief of
the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving unto God. 12:47 And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of
Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters, every day
his portion: and they sanctified holy things unto the Levites; and the
Levites sanctified them unto the children of Aaron. 13:1 On that day they read in the book of Moses in the audience of the
people; and therein was found written, that the Ammonite and the
Moabite should not come into the congregation of God for ever; 13:2
Because they met not the children of Israel with bread and with water,
but hired Balaam against them, that he should curse them: howbeit our
God turned the curse into a blessing. 13:3 Now it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they
separated from Israel all the mixed multitude. 13:4 And before this, Eliashib the priest, having the oversight of the
chamber of the house of our God, was allied unto Tobiah: 13:5 And he
had prepared for him a great chamber, where aforetime they laid the
meat offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithes of
the corn, the new wine, and the oil, which was commanded to be given
to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters; and the offerings of
the priests. 13:6 But in all this time was not I at Jerusalem: for in the two and
thirtieth year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon came I unto the king, and
after certain days obtained I leave of the king: 13:7 And I came to
Jerusalem, and understood of the evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah, in
preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God. 13:8 And it grieved me sore: therefore I cast forth all the household
stuff to Tobiah out of the chamber. 13:9 Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers: and thither
brought I again the vessels of the house of God, with the meat
offering and the frankincense. 13:10 And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been
given them: for the Levites and the singers, that did the work, were
fled every one to his field. 13:11 Then contended I with the rulers, and said, Why is the house of
God forsaken? And I gathered them together, and set them in their
place. 13:12 Then brought all Judah the tithe of the corn and the new wine
and the oil unto the treasuries. 13:13 And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest,
and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah: and next to them
was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah: for they were
counted faithful, and their office was to distribute unto their
brethren. 13:14 Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good
deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the offices
thereof. 13:15 In those days saw I in Judah some treading wine presses on the
sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and lading asses; as also wine,
grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into
Jerusalem on the sabbath day: and I testified against them in the day
wherein they sold victuals. 13:16 There dwelt men of Tyre also therein, which brought fish, and
all manner of ware, and sold on the sabbath unto the children of
Judah, and in Jerusalem. 13:17 Then I contended with the nobles of Judah, and said unto them,
What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day? 13:18 Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this
evil upon us, and upon this city? yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel
by profaning the sabbath. 13:19 And it came to pass, that when the gates of Jerusalem began to
be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the gates should be shut,
and charged that they should not be opened till after the sabbath: and
some of my servants set I at the gates, that there should no burden be
brought in on the sabbath day. 13:20 So the merchants and sellers of all kind of ware lodged without
Jerusalem once or twice. 13:21 Then I testified against them, and said unto them, Why lodge ye
about the wall? if ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that
time forth came they no more on the sabbath. 13:22 And I commanded the Levites that they should cleanse themselves,
and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath
day. Remember me, O my God, concerning this also, and spare me according to
the greatness of thy mercy. 13:23 In those days also saw I Jews that had married wives of Ashdod,
of Ammon, and of Moab: 13:24 And their children spake half in the
speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews' language, but
according to the language of each people. 13:25 And I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of
them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, saying,
Ye shall not give your daughters unto their sons, nor take their
daughters unto your sons, or for yourselves. 13:26 Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? yet among
many nations was there no king like him, who was beloved of his God,
and God made him king over all Israel: nevertheless even him did
outlandish women cause to sin. 13:27 Shall we then hearken unto you to do all this great evil, to
transgress against our God in marrying strange wives? 13:28 And one
of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was son in
law to Sanballat the Horonite: therefore I chased him from me. 13:29 Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the
priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites. 13:30 Thus cleansed I them from all strangers, and appointed the wards
of the priests and the Levites, every one in his business; 13:31 And
for the wood offering, at times appointed, and for the firstfruits. Remember me, O my God, for good. The Book of Esther


1:1 Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus, (this is Ahasuerus
which reigned, from India even unto Ethiopia, over an hundred and
seven and twenty provinces:) 1:2 That in those days, when the king
Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the
palace, 1:3 In the third year of his reign, he made a feast unto all
his princes and his servants; the power of Persia and Media, the
nobles and princes of the provinces, being before him: 1:4 When he
shewed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honour of his
excellent majesty many days, even an hundred and fourscore days. 1:5 And when these days were expired, the king made a feast unto all
the people that were present in Shushan the palace, both unto great
and small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's
palace; 1:6 Where were white, green, and blue, hangings, fastened with
cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble:
the beds were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red, and blue,
and white, and black, marble. 1:7 And they gave them drink in vessels of gold, (the vessels being
diverse one from another,) and royal wine in abundance, according to
the state of the king. 1:8 And the drinking was according to the law; none did compel: for so
the king had appointed to all the officers of his house, that they
should do according to every man's pleasure. 1:9 Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal
house which belonged to king Ahasuerus. 1:10 On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with
wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha,
Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains that served in the presence
of Ahasuerus the king, 1:11 To bring Vashti the queen before the king
with the crown royal, to shew the people and the princes her beauty:
for she was fair to look on. 1:12 But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king's commandment by
his chamberlains: therefore was the king very wroth, and his anger
burned in him. 1:13 Then the king said to the wise men, which knew the times, (for so
was the king's manner toward all that knew law and judgment: 1:14 And
the next unto him was Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres,
Marsena, and Memucan, the seven princes of Persia and Media, which saw
the king's face, and which sat the first in the kingdom;) 1:15 What
shall we do unto the queen Vashti according to law, because she hath
not performed the commandment of the king Ahasuerus by the
chamberlains? 1:16 And Memucan answered before the king and the
princes, Vashti the queen hath not done wrong to the king only, but
also to all the princes, and to all the people that are in all the
provinces of the king Ahasuerus. 1:17 For this deed of the queen shall come abroad unto all women, so
that they shall despise their husbands in their eyes, when it shall be
reported, The king Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be brought
in before him, but she came not. 1:18 Likewise shall the ladies of Persia and Media say this day unto
all the king's princes, which have heard of the deed of the queen. Thus shall there arise too much contempt and wrath. 1:19 If it please the king, let there go a royal commandment from him,
and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes,
that it be not altered, That Vashti come no more before king
Ahasuerus; and let the king give her royal estate unto another that is
better than she. 1:20 And when the king's decree which he shall make shall be published
throughout all his empire, (for it is great,) all the wives shall give
to their husbands honour, both to great and small. 1:21 And the saying pleased the king and the princes; and the king did
according to the word of Memucan: 1:22 For he sent letters into all
the king's provinces, into every province according to the writing
thereof, and to every people after their language, that every man
should bear rule in his own house, and that it should be published
according to the language of every people. 2:1 After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was appeased,
he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decreed
against her. 2:2 Then said the king's servants that ministered unto him, Let there
be fair young virgins sought for the king: 2:3 And let the king
appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, that they may
gather together all the fair young virgins unto Shushan the palace, to
the house of the women, unto the custody of Hege the king's
chamberlain, keeper of the women; and let their things for
purification be given them: 2:4 And let the maiden which pleaseth the
king be queen instead of Vashti. And the thing pleased the king; and he did so. 2:5 Now in Shushan the palace there was a certain Jew, whose name was
Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a
Benjamite; 2:6 Who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the
captivity which had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah,
whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away. 2:7 And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter:
for she had neither father nor mother, and the maid was fair and
beautiful; whom Mordecai, when her father and mother were dead, took
for his own daughter. 2:8 So it came to pass, when the king's commandment and his decree was
heard, and when many maidens were gathered together unto Shushan the
palace, to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was brought also unto the
king's house, to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women. 2:9 And the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness of him; and
he speedily gave her her things for purification, with such things as
belonged to her, and seven maidens, which were meet to be given her,
out of the king's house: and he preferred her and her maids unto the
best place of the house of the women. 2:10 Esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred: for Mordecai
had charged her that she should not shew it. 2:11 And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's
house, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her. 2:12 Now when every maid's turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus,
after that she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the
women, (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, to
wit, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours,
and with other things for the purifying of the women;) 2:13 Then thus
came every maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired was given her
to go with her out of the house of the women unto the king's house. 2:14 In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the
second house of the women, to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king's
chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no
more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were called by
name. 2:15 Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of
Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, was come to go in unto
the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain,
the keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained favour in the
sight of all them that looked upon her. 2:16 So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal in
the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his
reign. 2:17 And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained
grace and favour in his sight more than all the virgins; so that he
set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of
Vashti. 2:18 Then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his
servants, even Esther's feast; and he made a release to the provinces,
and gave gifts, according to the state of the king. 2:19 And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then
Mordecai sat in the king's gate. 2:20 Esther had not yet shewed her kindred nor her people; as Mordecai
had charged her: for Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, like as
when she was brought up with him. 2:21 In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king's gate, two of the
king's chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which kept the door,
were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the king Ahasuerus. 2:22 And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the
queen; and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai's name. 2:23 And when inquisition was made of the matter, it was found out;
therefore they were both hanged on a tree: and it was written in the
book of the chronicles before the king. 3:1 After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of
Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all
the princes that were with him. 3:2 And all the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, bowed,
and reverenced Haman: for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence. 3:3 Then the king's servants, which were in the king's gate, said unto
Mordecai, Why transgressest thou the king's commandment? 3:4 Now it
came to pass, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened not
unto them, that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai's matters
would stand: for he had told them that he was a Jew. 3:5 And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence,
then was Haman full of wrath. 3:6 And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had
shewed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore Haman sought to destroy
all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even
the people of Mordecai. 3:7 In the first month, that is, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year
of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman from
day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is,
the month Adar. 3:8 And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people
scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the provinces
of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from all people; neither
keep they the king's laws: therefore it is not for the king's profit
to suffer them. 3:9 If it please the king, let it be written that they may be
destroyed: and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands
of those that have the charge of the business, to bring it into the
king's treasuries. 3:10 And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman
the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy. 3:11 And the king said unto Haman, The silver is given to thee, the
people also, to do with them as it seemeth good to thee. 3:12 Then were the king's scribes called on the thirteenth day of the
first month, and there was written according to all that Haman had
commanded unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors that were
over every province, and to the rulers of every people of every
province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after
their language; in the name of king Ahasuerus was it written, and
sealed with the king's ring. 3:13 And the letters were sent by posts into all the king's provinces,
to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and
old, little children and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth
day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to take the
spoil of them for a prey. 3:14 The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
province was published unto all people, that they should be ready
against that day. 3:15 The posts went out, being hastened by the king's commandment, and
the decree was given in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat
down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed. 4:1 When Mordecai perceived all that was done, Mordecai rent his
clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst
of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry; 4:2 And came even
before the king's gate: for none might enter into the king's gate
clothed with sackcloth. 4:3 And in every province, whithersoever the king's commandment and
his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting,
and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes. 4:4 So Esther's maids and her chamberlains came and told it her. Then
was the queen exceedingly grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe
Mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he received it
not. 4:5 Then called Esther for Hatach, one of the king's chamberlains,
whom he had appointed to attend upon her, and gave him a commandment
to Mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was. 4:6 So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of the city,
which was before the king's gate. 4:7 And Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him, and of
the sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's
treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them. 4:8 Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was
given at Shushan to destroy them, to shew it unto Esther, and to
declare it unto her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the
king, to make supplication unto him, and to make request before him
for her people. 4:9 And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai. 4:10 Again Esther spake unto Hatach, and gave him commandment unto
Mordecai; 4:11 All the king's servants, and the people of the king's
provinces, do know, that whosoever, whether man or women, shall come
unto the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is one
law of his to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall
hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live: but I have not been
called to come in unto the king these thirty days. 4:12 And they told to Mordecai Esther's words. 4:13 Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thyself
that thou shalt escape in the king's house, more than all the Jews. 4:14 For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall
there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another
place; but thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed: and who
knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this? 4:15 Then Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer, 4:16 Go,
gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye
for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and
my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the king,
which is not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish. 4:17 So Mordecai went his way, and did according to all that Esther
had commanded him. 5:1 Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her royal
apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house, over
against the king's house: and the king sat upon his royal throne in
the royal house, over against the gate of the house. 5:2 And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in the
court, that she obtained favour in his sight: and the king held out to
Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near,
and touched the top of the sceptre. 5:3 Then said the king unto her, What wilt thou, queen Esther? and
what is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the
kingdom. 5:4 And Esther answered, If it seem good unto the king, let the king
and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have prepared for him. 5:5 Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste, that he may do as
Esther hath said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that
Esther had prepared. 5:6 And the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy
petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? even
to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed. 5:7 Then answered Esther, and said, My petition and my request is; 5:8
If I have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the
king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and
Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and I will do
to morrow as the king hath said. 5:9 Then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart: but
when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he stood not up, nor
moved for him, he was full of indignation against Mordecai. 5:10 Nevertheless Haman refrained himself: and when he came home, he
sent and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife. 5:11 And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude
of his children, and all the things wherein the king had promoted him,
and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the
king. 5:12 Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the queen did let no man come in
with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and
to morrow am I invited unto her also with the king. 5:13 Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the
Jew sitting at the king's gate. 5:14 Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him, Let a
gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto
the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in merrily
with the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he
caused the gallows to be made. 6:1 On that night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring
the book of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the
king. 6:2 And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and
Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who
sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus. 6:3 And the king said, What honour and dignity hath been done to
Mordecai for this? Then said the king's servants that ministered unto
him, There is nothing done for him. 6:4 And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman was come into
the outward court of the king's house, to speak unto the king to hang
Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him. 6:5 And the king's servants said unto him, Behold, Haman standeth in
the court. And the king said, Let him come in. 6:6 So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shall be done
unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? Now Haman thought in
his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to
myself? 6:7 And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king
delighteth to honour, 6:8 Let the royal apparel be brought which the
king useth to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, and the
crown royal which is set upon his head: 6:9 And let this apparel and
horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble
princes, that they may array the man withal whom the king delighteth
to honour, and bring him on horseback through the street of the city,
and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the
king delighteth to honour. 6:10 Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and take the apparel and
the horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that
sitteth at the king's gate: let nothing fail of all that thou hast
spoken. 6:11 Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai,
and brought him on horseback through the street of the city, and
proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the
king delighteth to honour. 6:12 And Mordecai came again to the king's gate. But Haman hasted to
his house mourning, and having his head covered. 6:13 And Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his friends every thing
that had befallen him. Then said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto
him, If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou hast
begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely
fall before him. 6:14 And while they were yet talking with him, came the king's
chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet that Esther
had prepared. 7:1 So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen. 7:2 And the king said again unto Esther on the second day at the
banquet of wine, What is thy petition, queen Esther? and it shall be
granted thee: and what is thy request? and it shall be performed, even
to the half of the kingdom. 7:3 Then Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found favour in
thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me
at my petition, and my people at my request: 7:4 For we are sold, I
and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we
had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue,
although the enemy could not countervail the king's damage. 7:5 Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the queen,
Who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so? 7:6 And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen. 7:7 And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath went
into the palace garden: and Haman stood up to make request for his
life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil determined
against him by the king. 7:8 Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of
the banquet of wine; and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon Esther
was. Then said the king, Will he force the queen also before me in the
house? As the word went out of king's mouth, they covered Haman's
face. 7:9 And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king,
Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for
Mordecai, who spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of
Haman. Then the king said, Hang him thereon. 7:10 So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for
Mordecai. Then was the king's wrath pacified. 8:1 On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the
Jews' enemy unto Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king;
for Esther had told what he was unto her. 8:2 And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and
gave it unto Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of
Haman. 8:3 And Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his
feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman
the Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews. 8:4 Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. So Esther
arose, and stood before the king, 8:5 And said, If it please the king,
and if I have favour in his sight, and the thing seem right before the
king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the
letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he
wrote to destroy the Jews which are in all the king's provinces: 8:6
For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred? 8:7 Then
the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew,
Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have
hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews. 8:8 Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh you, in the king's name,
and seal it with the king's ring: for the writing which is written in
the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse. 8:9 Then were the king's scribes called at that time in the third
month, that is, the month Sivan, on the three and twentieth day
thereof; and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded
unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the deputies and rulers of
the provinces which are from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty
and seven provinces, unto every province according to the writing
thereof, and unto every people after their language, and to the Jews
according to their writing, and according to their language. 8:10 And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus' name, and sealed it with the
king's ring, and sent letters by posts on horseback, and riders on
mules, camels, and young dromedaries: 8:11 Wherein the king granted
the Jews which were in every city to gather themselves together, and
to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay and to cause to perish,
all the power of the people and province that would assault them, both
little ones and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey, 8:12
Upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar. 8:13 The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
province was published unto all people, and that the Jews should be
ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies. 8:14 So the posts that rode upon mules and camels went out, being
hastened and pressed on by the king's commandment. And the decree was
given at Shushan the palace. 8:15 And Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal
apparel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a
garment of fine linen and purple: and the city of Shushan rejoiced and
was glad. 8:16 The Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and honour. 8:17 And in every province, and in every city, whithersoever the
king's commandment and his decree came, the Jews had joy and gladness,
a feast and a good day. And many of the people of the land became
Jews; for the fear of the Jews fell upon them. 9:1 Now in the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar, on the
thirteenth day of the same, when the king's commandment and his decree
drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the
Jews hoped to have power over them, (though it was turned to the
contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated them;) 9:2 The
Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the
provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their
hurt: and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell upon
all people. 9:3 And all the rulers of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the
deputies, and officers of the king, helped the Jews; because the fear
of Mordecai fell upon them. 9:4 For Mordecai was great in the king's house, and his fame went out
throughout all the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater and
greater. 9:5 Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the
sword, and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto
those that hated them. 9:6 And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five hundred
men. 9:7 And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha, 9:8 And Poratha, and
Adalia, and Aridatha, 9:9 And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and
Vajezatha, 9:10 The ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy
of the Jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand. 9:11 On that day the number of those that were slain in Shushan the
palace was brought before the king. 9:12 And the king said unto Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and
destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of
Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces? now
what is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: or what is thy
request further? and it shall be done. 9:13 Then said Esther, If it please the king, let it be granted to the
Jews which are in Shushan to do to morrow also according unto this
day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows. 9:14 And the king commanded it so to be done: and the decree was given
at Shushan; and they hanged Haman's ten sons. 9:15 For the Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together on
the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men
at Shushan; but on the prey they laid not their hand. 9:16 But the other Jews that were in the king's provinces gathered
themselves together, and stood for their lives, and had rest from
their enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but
they laid not their hands on the prey, 9:17 On the thirteenth day of
the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day of the same rested they, and
made it a day of feasting and gladness. 9:18 But the Jews that were at Shushan assembled together on the
thirteenth day thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the
fifteenth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting
and gladness. 9:19 Therefore the Jews of the villages, that dwelt in the unwalled
towns, made the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of gladness and
feasting, and a good day, and of sending portions one to another. 9:20 And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the
Jews that were in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, both nigh
and far, 9:21 To stablish this among them, that they should keep the
fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same,
yearly, 9:22 As the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies,
and the month which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from
mourning into a good day: that they should make them days of feasting
and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the
poor. 9:23 And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai
had written unto them; 9:24 Because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the
Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had devised against the Jews to
destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, to consume them, and
to destroy them; 9:25 But when Esther came before the king, he
commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he devised against
the Jews, should return upon his own head, and that he and his sons
should be hanged on the gallows. 9:26 Wherefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur. Therefore for all the words of this letter, and of that which they had
seen concerning this matter, and which had come unto them, 9:27 The
Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all
such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that
they would keep these two days according to their writing, and
according to their appointed time every year; 9:28 And that these days
should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every
family, every province, and every city; and that these days of Purim
should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish
from their seed. 9:29 Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the
Jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim. 9:30 And he sent the letters unto all the Jews, to the hundred twenty
and seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace
and truth, 9:31 To confirm these days of Purim in their times
appointed, according as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had
enjoined them, and as they had decreed for themselves and for their
seed, the matters of the fastings and their cry. 9:32 And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it
was written in the book. 10:1 And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the
isles of the sea. 10:2 And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the
declaration of the greatness of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced
him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Media and Persia? 10:3 For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king
Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of
his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to
all his seed. The Book of Job


1:1 There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that
man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil. 1:2 And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters. 1:3 His substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand
camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and
a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the
men of the east. 1:4 And his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day;
and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with
them. 1:5 And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about,
that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning,
and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for
Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their
hearts. Thus did Job continually. 1:6 Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present
themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them. 1:7 And the LORD said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan
answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it. 1:8 And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? 1:9 Then Satan
answered the LORD, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought? 1:10 Hast
not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his hands,
and his substance is increased in the land. 1:11 But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he
will curse thee to thy face. 1:12 And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy
power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth
from the presence of the LORD. 1:13 And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating
and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house: 1:14 And there came
a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and the asses
feeding beside them: 1:15 And the Sabeans fell upon them, and took
them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the
sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 1:16 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The
fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and
the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee. 1:17 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The
Chaldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have
carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the
sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 1:18 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy
sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest
brother's house: 1:19 And, behold, there came a great wind from the
wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon
the young men, and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee. 1:20 Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and
fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, 1:21 And said, Naked came I
out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the LORD
gave, and the LORD hath taken away; blessed be the name of the LORD. 1:22 In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. 2:1 Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present
themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them to present
himself before the LORD. 2:2 And the LORD said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And Satan
answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it. 2:3 And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth
fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy
him without cause. 2:4 And Satan answered the LORD, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all
that a man hath will he give for his life. 2:5 But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh,
and he will curse thee to thy face. 2:6 And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but
save his life. 2:7 So went Satan forth from the presence of the LORD, and smote Job
with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown. 2:8 And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat
down among the ashes. 2:9 Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thine
integrity? curse God, and die. 2:10 But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women
speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we
not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips. 2:11 Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that was come
upon him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the
Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they
had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him and to
comfort him. 2:12 And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not,
they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his
mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven. 2:13 So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven
nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief
was very great. 3:1 After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day. 3:2 And Job spake, and said, 3:3 Let the day perish wherein I was
born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child
conceived. 3:4 Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above,
neither let the light shine upon it. 3:5 Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell
upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it. 3:6 As for that night, let darkness seize upon it; let it not be
joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of
the months. 3:7 Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein. 3:8 Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up
their mourning. 3:9 Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for
light, but have none; neither let it see the dawning of the day: 3:10
Because it shut not up the doors of my mother's womb, nor hid sorrow
from mine eyes. 3:11 Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost
when I came out of the belly? 3:12 Why did the knees prevent me? or
why the breasts that I should suck? 3:13 For now should I have lain
still and been quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest,
3:14 With kings and counsellors of the earth, which build desolate
places for themselves; 3:15 Or with princes that had gold, who filled
their houses with silver: 3:16 Or as an hidden untimely birth I had
not been; as infants which never saw light. 3:17 There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at
rest. 3:18 There the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the
oppressor. 3:19 The small and great are there; and the servant is free from his
master. 3:20 Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto
the bitter in soul; 3:21 Which long for death, but it cometh not; and
dig for it more than for hid treasures; 3:22 Which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave? 3:23 Why is
light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged in? 3:24 For my sighing cometh before I eat, and my roarings are poured
out like the waters. 3:25 For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that
which I was afraid of is come unto me. 3:26 I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet
trouble came. 4:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, 4:2 If we assay to
commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who can withhold himself
from speaking? 4:3 Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou hast
strengthened the weak hands. 4:4 Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast
strengthened the feeble knees. 4:5 But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee,
and thou art troubled. 4:6 Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the
uprightness of thy ways? 4:7 Remember, I pray thee, who ever
perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? 4:8
Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap
the same. 4:9 By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils
are they consumed. 4:10 The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and
the teeth of the young lions, are broken. 4:11 The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion's
whelps are scattered abroad. 4:12 Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a
little thereof. 4:13 In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep
falleth on men, 4:14 Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all
my bones to shake. 4:15 Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood
up: 4:16 It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an
image was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice,
saying, 4:17 Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be
more pure than his maker? 4:18 Behold, he put no trust in his
servants; and his angels he charged with folly: 4:19 How much less in
them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust,
which are crushed before the moth? 4:20 They are destroyed from
morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding it. 4:21 Doth not their excellency which is in them go away? they die,
even without wisdom. 5:1 Call now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of
the saints wilt thou turn? 5:2 For wrath killeth the foolish man, and
envy slayeth the silly one. 5:3 I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his
habitation. 5:4 His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the
gate, neither is there any to deliver them. 5:5 Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the
thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance. 5:6 Although affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth
trouble spring out of the ground; 5:7 Yet man is born unto trouble, as
the sparks fly upward. 5:8 I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause: 5:9
Which doeth great things and unsearchable; marvellous things without
number: 5:10 Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon
the fields: 5:11 To set up on high those that be low; that those which
mourn may be exalted to safety. 5:12 He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise. 5:13 He taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of
the froward is carried headlong. 5:14 They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope in the noonday
as in the night. 5:15 But he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from
the hand of the mighty. 5:16 So the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth. 5:17 Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise
not thou the chastening of the Almighty: 5:18 For he maketh sore, and
bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole. 5:19 He shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall
no evil touch thee. 5:20 In famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the
power of the sword. 5:21 Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt
thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh. 5:22 At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be
afraid of the beasts of the earth. 5:23 For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the
beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. 5:24 And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace; and
thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin. 5:25 Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine
offspring as the grass of the earth. 5:26 Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of
corn cometh in in his season. 5:27 Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it
for thy good. 6:1 But Job answered and said, 6:2 Oh that my grief were throughly
weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together! 6:3 For now
it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are
swallowed up. 6:4 For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array
against me. 6:5 Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over
his fodder? 6:6 Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or
is there any taste in the white of an egg? 6:7 The things that my
soul refused to touch are as my sorrowful meat. 6:8 Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the
thing that I long for! 6:9 Even that it would please God to destroy
me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off! 6:10 Then
should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let
him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One. 6:11 What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end,
that I should prolong my life? 6:12 Is my strength the strength of
stones? or is my flesh of brass? 6:13 Is not my help in me? and is
wisdom driven quite from me? 6:14 To him that is afflicted pity
should be shewed from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the
Almighty. 6:15 My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream
of brooks they pass away; 6:16 Which are blackish by reason of the
ice, and wherein the snow is hid: 6:17 What time they wax warm, they
vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place. 6:18 The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and
perish. 6:19 The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for
them. 6:20 They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither,
and were ashamed. 6:21 For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid. 6:22 Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your
substance? 6:23 Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? or, Redeem me
from the hand of the mighty? 6:24 Teach me, and I will hold my
tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I have erred. 6:25 How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove? 6:26 Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is
desperate, which are as wind? 6:27 Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless,
and ye dig a pit for your friend. 6:28 Now therefore be content, look upon me; for it is evident unto
you if I lie. 6:29 Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my
righteousness is in it. 6:30 Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse
things? 7:1 Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not
his days also like the days of an hireling? 7:2 As a servant
earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling looketh for the
reward of his work: 7:3 So am I made to possess months of vanity, and
wearisome nights are appointed to me. 7:4 When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day. 7:5 My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is
broken, and become loathsome. 7:6 My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without
hope. 7:7 O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good. 7:8 The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes
are upon me, and I am not. 7:9 As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down
to the grave shall come up no more. 7:10 He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place
know him any more. 7:11 Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the
anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. 7:12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me? 7:13
When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaints; 7:14 Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me
through visions: 7:15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death
rather than my life. 7:16 I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days
are vanity. 7:17 What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou
shouldest set thine heart upon him? 7:18 And that thou shouldest
visit him every morning, and try him every moment? 7:19 How long wilt
thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my
spittle? 7:20 I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so
that I am a burden to myself? 7:21 And why dost thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away my iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the
dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be. 8:1 Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, 8:2 How long wilt thou
speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like
a strong wind? 8:3 Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty
pervert justice? 8:4 If thy children have sinned against him, and he
have cast them away for their transgression; 8:5 If thou wouldest seek
unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty; 8:6 If
thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and
make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. 8:7 Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
increase. 8:8 For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself
to the search of their fathers: 8:9 (For we are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:) 8:10 Shall
not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their
heart? 8:11 Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow
without water? 8:12 Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut
down, it withereth before any other herb. 8:13 So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite's hope
shall perish: 8:14 Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall
be a spider's web. 8:15 He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall
hold it fast, but it shall not endure. 8:16 He is green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his
garden. 8:17 His roots are wrapped about the heap, and seeth the place of
stones. 8:18 If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying,
I have not seen thee. 8:19 Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
others grow. 8:20 Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers: 8:21 Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and
thy lips with rejoicing. 8:22 They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling
place of the wicked shall come to nought. 9:1 Then Job answered and said, 9:2 I know it is so of a truth: but
how should man be just with God? 9:3 If he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand. 9:4 He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened
himself against him, and hath prospered? 9:5 Which removeth the
mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger. 9:6 Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble. 9:7 Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the
stars. 9:8 Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves
of the sea. 9:9 Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of
the south. 9:10 Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders
without number. 9:11 Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he passeth on also, but I
perceive him not. 9:12 Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto
him, What doest thou? 9:13 If God will not withdraw his anger, the
proud helpers do stoop under him. 9:14 How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to
reason with him? 9:15 Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not
answer, but I would make supplication to my judge. 9:16 If I had called, and he had answered me; yet would I not believe
that he had hearkened unto my voice. 9:17 For he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds
without cause. 9:18 He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with
bitterness. 9:19 If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who
shall set me a time to plead? 9:20 If I justify myself, mine own
mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse. 9:21 Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would
despise my life. 9:22 This is one thing, therefore I said it, He destroyeth the perfect
and the wicked. 9:23 If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the
innocent. 9:24 The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the
faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he? 9:25 Now
my days are swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good. 9:26 They are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that
hasteth to the prey. 9:27 If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my
heaviness, and comfort myself: 9:28 I am afraid of all my sorrows, I
know that thou wilt not hold me innocent. 9:29 If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain? 9:30 If I wash myself
with snow water, and make my hands never so clean; 9:31 Yet shalt thou
plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me. 9:32 For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we
should come together in judgment. 9:33 Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand
upon us both. 9:34 Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify
me: 9:35 Then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with
me. 10:1 My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon
myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. 10:2 I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou
contendest with me. 10:3 Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou
shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel
of the wicked? 10:4 Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man
seeth? 10:5 Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man's
days, 10:6 That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest
after my sin? 10:7 Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and there is
none that can deliver out of thine hand. 10:8 Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about;
yet thou dost destroy me. 10:9 Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and
wilt thou bring me into dust again? 10:10 Hast thou not poured me out
as milk, and curdled me like cheese? 10:11 Thou hast clothed me with
skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with bones and sinews. 10:12 Thou hast granted me life and favour, and thy visitation hath
preserved my spirit. 10:13 And these things hast thou hid in thine heart: I know that this
is with thee. 10:14 If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from
mine iniquity. 10:15 If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I
not lift up my head. I am full of confusion; therefore see thou mine
affliction; 10:16 For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion:
and again thou shewest thyself marvellous upon me. 10:17 Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine
indignation upon me; changes and war are against me. 10:18 Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh
that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me! 10:19 I should
have been as though I had not been; I should have been carried from
the womb to the grave. 10:20 Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may
take comfort a little, 10:21 Before I go whence I shall not return,
even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death; 10:22 A land of
darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death, without any
order, and where the light is as darkness. 11:1 Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said, 11:2 Should not
the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of talk be
justified? 11:3 Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when
thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed? 11:4 For thou hast
said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes. 11:5 But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee; 11:6
And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are
double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less
than thine iniquity deserveth. 11:7 Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection? 11:8 It is as high as heaven; what canst
thou do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know? 11:9 The measure
thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea. 11:10 If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can
hinder him? 11:11 For he knoweth vain men: he seeth wickedness also;
will he not then consider it? 11:12 For vain men would be wise,
though man be born like a wild ass's colt. 11:13 If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward
him; 11:14 If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles. 11:15 For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou
shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear: 11:16 Because thou shalt forget
thy misery, and remember it as waters that pass away: 11:17 And thine
age shall be clearer than the noonday: thou shalt shine forth, thou
shalt be as the morning. 11:18 And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt
dig about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in safety. 11:19 Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea,
many shall make suit unto thee. 11:20 But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not
escape, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost. 12:1 And Job answered and said, 12:2 No doubt but ye are the people,
and wisdom shall die with you. 12:3 But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to
you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these? 12:4 I am as one
mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he answereth him:
the just upright man is laughed to scorn. 12:5 He that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in
the thought of him that is at ease. 12:6 The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are
secure; into whose hand God bringeth abundantly. 12:7 But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls
of the air, and they shall tell thee: 12:8 Or speak to the earth, and
it shall teach thee: and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto
thee. 12:9 Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the LORD hath
wrought this? 12:10 In whose hand is the soul of every living thing,
and the breath of all mankind. 12:11 Doth not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat? 12:12
With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days understanding. 12:13 With him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and
understanding. 12:14 Behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot be built again: he
shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening. 12:15 Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he
sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth. 12:16 With him is strength and wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver
are his. 12:17 He leadeth counsellors away spoiled, and maketh the judges
fools. 12:18 He looseth the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a
girdle. 12:19 He leadeth princes away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty. 12:20 He removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the
understanding of the aged. 12:21 He poureth contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of
the mighty. 12:22 He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to
light the shadow of death. 12:23 He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the
nations, and straiteneth them again. 12:24 He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the
earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no
way. 12:25 They grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to
stagger like a drunken man. 13:1 Lo, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath heard and
understood it. 13:2 What ye know, the same do I know also: I am not inferior unto
you. 13:3 Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with
God. 13:4 But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value. 13:5 O that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your
wisdom. 13:6 Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips. 13:7 Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him? 13:8 Will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God? 13:9 Is it
good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do
ye so mock him? 13:10 He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly
accept persons. 13:11 Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall
upon you? 13:12 Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to
bodies of clay. 13:13 Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on
me what will. 13:14 Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in
mine hand? 13:15 Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I
will maintain mine own ways before him. 13:16 He also shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come
before him. 13:17 Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears. 13:18 Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shall be
justified. 13:19 Who is he that will plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue,
I shall give up the ghost. 13:20 Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide myself from
thee. 13:21 Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread make me
afraid. 13:22 Then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer
thou me. 13:23 How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my
transgression and my sin. 13:24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy? 13:25 Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue
the dry stubble? 13:26 For thou writest bitter things against me, and
makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth. 13:27 Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and lookest narrowly
unto all my paths; thou settest a print upon the heels of my feet. 13:28 And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth, as a garment that is moth
eaten. 14:1 Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble. 14:2 He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as
a shadow, and continueth not. 14:3 And doth thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bringest me
into judgment with thee? 14:4 Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one. 14:5 Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass; 14:6 Turn
from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as an hireling,
his day. 14:7 For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will
sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. 14:8 Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock
thereof die in the ground; 14:9 Yet through the scent of water it will
bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant. 14:10 But man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost,
and where is he? 14:11 As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood
decayeth and drieth up: 14:12 So man lieth down, and riseth not: till
the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of
their sleep. 14:13 O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest
keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me
a set time, and remember me! 14:14 If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come. 14:15 Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire
to the work of thine hands. 14:16 For now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my
sin? 14:17 My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up
mine iniquity. 14:18 And surely the mountains falling cometh to nought, and the rock
is removed out of his place. 14:19 The waters wear the stones: thou washest away the things which
grow out of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of
man. 14:20 Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou
changest his countenance, and sendest him away. 14:21 His sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are
brought low, but he perceiveth it not of them. 14:22 But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him
shall mourn. 15:1 Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said, 15:2 Should a wise
man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind? 15:3
Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith he
can do no good? 15:4 Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest
prayer before God. 15:5 For thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity, and thou choosest the
tongue of the crafty. 15:6 Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips
testify against thee. 15:7 Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before
the hills? 15:8 Hast thou heard the secret of God? and dost thou
restrain wisdom to thyself? 15:9 What knowest thou, that we know not? what understandest thou, which is not in us? 15:10 With us are both
the grayheaded and very aged men, much elder than thy father. 15:11 Are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret
thing with thee? 15:12 Why doth thine heart carry thee away? and what
do thy eyes wink at, 15:13 That thou turnest thy spirit against God,
and lettest such words go out of thy mouth? 15:14 What is man, that
he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be
righteous? 15:15 Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the
heavens are not clean in his sight. 15:16 How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh
iniquity like water? 15:17 I will shew thee, hear me; and that which
I have seen I will declare; 15:18 Which wise men have told from their
fathers, and have not hid it: 15:19 Unto whom alone the earth was
given, and no stranger passed among them. 15:20 The wicked man travaileth with pain all his days, and the number
of years is hidden to the oppressor. 15:21 A dreadful sound is in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer
shall come upon him. 15:22 He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is
waited for of the sword. 15:23 He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knoweth
that the day of darkness is ready at his hand. 15:24 Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail
against him, as a king ready to the battle. 15:25 For he stretcheth out his hand against God, and strengtheneth
himself against the Almighty.