16:18 And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she
sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this
once, for he hath shewed me all his heart. Then the lords of the
Philistines came up unto her, and brought money in their hand. 16:19 And she made him sleep upon her knees; and she called for a man,
and she caused him to shave off the seven locks of his head; and she
began to afflict him, and his strength went from him. 16:20 And she said, The Philistines be upon thee, Samson. And he awoke
out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times before,
and shake myself. And he wist not that the LORD was departed from him. 16:21 But the Philistines took him, and put out his eyes, and brought
him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass; and he did
grind in the prison house. 16:22 Howbeit the hair of his head began to grow again after he was
shaven. 16:23 Then the lords of the Philistines gathered them together for to
offer a great sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
said, Our god hath delivered Samson our enemy into our hand. 16:24 And when the people saw him, they praised their god: for they
said, Our god hath delivered into our hands our enemy, and the
destroyer of our country, which slew many of us. 16:25 And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they
said, Call for Samson, that he may make us sport. And they called for
Samson out of the prison house; and he made them sport: and they set
him between the pillars. 16:26 And Samson said unto the lad that held him by the hand, Suffer
me that I may feel the pillars whereupon the house standeth, that I
may lean upon them. 16:27 Now the house was full of men and women; and all the lords of
the Philistines were there; and there were upon the roof about three
thousand men and women, that beheld while Samson made sport. 16:28 And Samson called unto the LORD, and said, O Lord God, remember
me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O
God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes. 16:29 And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the
house stood, and on which it was borne up, of the one with his right
hand, and of the other with his left. 16:30 And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed
himself with all his might; and the house fell upon the lords, and
upon all the people that were therein. So the dead which he slew at
his death were more than they which he slew in his life. 16:31 Then his brethren and all the house of his father came down, and
took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol
in the buryingplace of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty
years. 17:1 And there was a man of mount Ephraim, whose name was Micah. 17:2 And he said unto his mother, The eleven hundred shekels of silver
that were taken from thee, about which thou cursedst, and spakest of
also in mine ears, behold, the silver is with me; I took it. And his
mother said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my son. 17:3 And when he had restored the eleven hundred shekels of silver to
his mother, his mother said, I had wholly dedicated the silver unto
the LORD from my hand for my son, to make a graven image and a molten
image: now therefore I will restore it unto thee. 17:4 Yet he restored the money unto his mother; and his mother took
two hundred shekels of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made
thereof a graven image and a molten image: and they were in the house
of Micah. 17:5 And the man Micah had an house of gods, and made an ephod, and
teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest. 17:6 In those days there was no king in Israel, but every man did that
which was right in his own eyes. 17:7 And there was a young man out of Bethlehemjudah of the family of
Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there. 17:8 And the man departed out of the city from Bethlehemjudah to
sojourn where he could find a place: and he came to mount Ephraim to
the house of Micah, as he journeyed. 17:9 And Micah said unto him, Whence comest thou? And he said unto
him, I am a Levite of Bethlehemjudah, and I go to sojourn where I may
find a place. 17:10 And Micah said unto him, Dwell with me, and be unto me a father
and a priest, and I will give thee ten shekels of silver by the year,
and a suit of apparel, and thy victuals. So the Levite went in. 17:11 And the Levite was content to dwell with the man; and the young
man was unto him as one of his sons. 17:12 And Micah consecrated the Levite; and the young man became his
priest, and was in the house of Micah. 17:13 Then said Micah, Now know I that the LORD will do me good,
seeing I have a Levite to my priest. 18:1 In those days there was no king in Israel: and in those days the
tribe of the Danites sought them an inheritance to dwell in; for unto
that day all their inheritance had not fallen unto them among the
tribes of Israel. 18:2 And the children of Dan sent of their family five men from their
coasts, men of valour, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the
land, and to search it; and they said unto them, Go, search the land:
who when they came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah, they
lodged there. 18:3 When they were by the house of Micah, they knew the voice of the
young man the Levite: and they turned in thither, and said unto him,
Who brought thee hither? and what makest thou in this place? and what
hast thou here? 18:4 And he said unto them, Thus and thus dealeth
Micah with me, and hath hired me, and I am his priest. 18:5 And they said unto him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that
we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous. 18:6 And the priest said unto them, Go in peace: before the LORD is
your way wherein ye go. 18:7 Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people
that were therein, how they dwelt careless, after the manner of the
Zidonians, quiet and secure; and there was no magistrate in the land,
that might put them to shame in any thing; and they were far from the
Zidonians, and had no business with any man. 18:8 And they came unto their brethren to Zorah and Eshtaol: and their
brethren said unto them, What say ye? 18:9 And they said, Arise, that
we may go up against them: for we have seen the land, and, behold, it
is very good: and are ye still? be not slothful to go, and to enter to
possess the land. 18:10 When ye go, ye shall come unto a people secure, and to a large
land: for God hath given it into your hands; a place where there is no
want of any thing that is in the earth. 18:11 And there went from thence of the family of the Danites, out of
Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men appointed with weapons of
war. 18:12 And they went up, and pitched in Kirjathjearim, in Judah:
wherefore they called that place Mahanehdan unto this day: behold, it
is behind Kirjathjearim. 18:13 And they passed thence unto mount Ephraim, and came unto the
house of Micah. 18:14 Then answered the five men that went to spy out the country of
Laish, and said unto their brethren, Do ye know that there is in these
houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image? now therefore consider what ye have to do. 18:15 And they turned thitherward, and came to the house of the young
man the Levite, even unto the house of Micah, and saluted him. 18:16 And the six hundred men appointed with their weapons of war,
which were of the children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate. 18:17 And the five men that went to spy out the land went up, and came
in thither, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the
teraphim, and the molten image: and the priest stood in the entering
of the gate with the six hundred men that were appointed with weapons
of war. 18:18 And these went into Micah's house, and fetched the carved image,
the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. Then said the
priest unto them, What do ye? 18:19 And they said unto him, Hold thy
peace, lay thine hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a
father and a priest: is it better for thee to be a priest unto the
house of one man, or that thou be a priest unto a tribe and a family
in Israel? 18:20 And the priest's heart was glad, and he took the
ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst
of the people. 18:21 So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the
cattle and the carriage before them. 18:22 And when they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men
that were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together,
and overtook the children of Dan. 18:23 And they cried unto the children of Dan. And they turned their
faces, and said unto Micah, What aileth thee, that thou comest with
such a company? 18:24 And he said, Ye have taken away my gods which I
made, and the priest, and ye are gone away: and what have I more? and
what is this that ye say unto me, What aileth thee? 18:25 And the
children of Dan said unto him, Let not thy voice be heard among us,
lest angry fellows run upon thee, and thou lose thy life, with the
lives of thy household. 18:26 And the children of Dan went their way: and when Micah saw that
they were too strong for him, he turned and went back unto his house. 18:27 And they took the things which Micah had made, and the priest
which he had, and came unto Laish, unto a people that were at quiet
and secure: and they smote them with the edge of the sword, and burnt
the city with fire. 18:28 And there was no deliverer, because it was far from Zidon, and
they had no business with any man; and it was in the valley that lieth
by Bethrehob. And they built a city, and dwelt therein. 18:29 And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan
their father, who was born unto Israel: howbeit the name of the city
was Laish at the first. 18:30 And the children of Dan set up the graven image: and Jonathan,
the son of Gershom, the son of Manasseh, he and his sons were priests
to the tribe of Dan until the day of the captivity of the land. 18:31 And they set them up Micah's graven image, which he made, all
the time that the house of God was in Shiloh. 19:1 And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in
Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the side of
mount Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Bethlehemjudah. 19:2 And his concubine played the whore against him, and went away
from him unto her father's house to Bethlehemjudah, and was there four
whole months. 19:3 And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak friendly unto
her, and to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple
of asses: and she brought him into her father's house: and when the
father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him. 19:4 And his father in law, the damsel's father, retained him; and he
abode with him three days: so they did eat and drink, and lodged
there. 19:5 And it came to pass on the fourth day, when they arose early in
the morning, that he rose up to depart: and the damsel's father said
unto his son in law, Comfort thine heart with a morsel of bread, and
afterward go your way. 19:6 And they sat down, and did eat and drink both of them together:
for the damsel's father had said unto the man, Be content, I pray
thee, and tarry all night, and let thine heart be merry. 19:7 And when the man rose up to depart, his father in law urged him:
therefore he lodged there again. 19:8 And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart; and
the damsel's father said, Comfort thine heart, I pray thee. And they
tarried until afternoon, and they did eat both of them. 19:9 And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and
his servant, his father in law, the damsel's father, said unto him,
Behold, now the day draweth toward evening, I pray you tarry all
night: behold, the day groweth to an end, lodge here, that thine heart
may be merry; and to morrow get you early on your way, that thou
mayest go home. 19:10 But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and
departed, and came over against Jebus, which is Jerusalem; and there
were with him two asses saddled, his concubine also was with him. 19:11 And when they were by Jebus, the day was far spent; and the
servant said unto his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn in
into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it. 19:12 And his master said unto him, We will not turn aside hither into
the city of a stranger, that is not of the children of Israel; we will
pass over to Gibeah. 19:13 And he said unto his servant, Come, and let us draw near to one
of these places to lodge all night, in Gibeah, or in Ramah. 19:14 And they passed on and went their way; and the sun went down
upon them when they were by Gibeah, which belongeth to Benjamin. 19:15 And they turned aside thither, to go in and to lodge in Gibeah:
and when he went in, he sat him down in a street of the city: for
there was no man that took them into his house to lodging. 19:16 And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the
field at even, which was also of mount Ephraim; and he sojourned in
Gibeah: but the men of the place were Benjamites. 19:17 And when he had lifted up his eyes, he saw a wayfaring man in
the street of the city: and the old man said, Whither goest thou? and
whence comest thou? 19:18 And he said unto him, We are passing from
Bethlehemjudah toward the side of mount Ephraim; from thence am I: and
I went to Bethlehemjudah, but I am now going to the house of the LORD;
and there is no man that receiveth me to house. 19:19 Yet there is both straw and provender for our asses; and there
is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young
man which is with thy servants: there is no want of any thing. 19:20 And the old man said, Peace be with thee; howsoever let all thy
wants lie upon me; only lodge not in the street. 19:21 So he brought him into his house, and gave provender unto the
asses: and they washed their feet, and did eat and drink. 19:22 Now as they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of
the city, certain sons of Belial, beset the house round about, and
beat at the door, and spake to the master of the house, the old man,
saying, Bring forth the man that came into thine house, that we may
know him. 19:23 And the man, the master of the house, went out unto them, and
said unto them, Nay, my brethren, nay, I pray you, do not so wickedly;
seeing that this man is come into mine house, do not this folly. 19:24 Behold, here is my daughter a maiden, and his concubine; them I
will bring out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seemeth
good unto you: but unto this man do not so vile a thing. 19:25 But the men would not hearken to him: so the man took his
concubine, and brought her forth unto them; and they knew her, and
abused her all the night until the morning: and when the day began to
spring, they let her go. 19:26 Then came the woman in the dawning of the day, and fell down at
the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light. 19:27 And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the
house, and went out to go his way: and, behold, the woman his
concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, and her hands were
upon the threshold. 19:28 And he said unto her, Up, and let us be going. But none
answered. Then the man took her up upon an ass, and the man rose up, and gat him
unto his place. 19:29 And when he was come into his house, he took a knife, and laid
hold on his concubine, and divided her, together with her bones, into
twelve pieces, and sent her into all the coasts of Israel. 19:30 And it was so, that all that saw it said, There was no such deed
done nor seen from the day that the children of Israel came up out of
the land of Egypt unto this day: consider of it, take advice, and
speak your minds. 20:1 Then all the children of Israel went out, and the congregation
was gathered together as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the
land of Gilead, unto the LORD in Mizpeh. 20:2 And the chief of all the people, even of all the tribes of
Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God,
four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword. 20:3 (Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel
were gone up to Mizpeh.) Then said the children of Israel, Tell us,
how was this wickedness? 20:4 And the Levite, the husband of the
woman that was slain, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that
belongeth to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge. 20:5 And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round
about upon me by night, and thought to have slain me: and my concubine
have they forced, that she is dead. 20:6 And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her
throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel: for they have
committed lewdness and folly in Israel. 20:7 Behold, ye are all children of Israel; give here your advice and
counsel. 20:8 And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of
us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn into his house. 20:9 But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah; we
will go up by lot against it; 20:10 And we will take ten men of an
hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and an hundred of a
thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch victual for the
people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin,
according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel. 20:11 So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit
together as one man. 20:12 And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of
Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that is done among you? 20:13 Now therefore deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which
are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from
Israel. But the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of
their brethren the children of Israel. 20:14 But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of
the cities unto Gibeah, to go out to battle against the children of
Israel. 20:15 And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of
the cities twenty and six thousand men that drew sword, beside the
inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred chosen men. 20:16 Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men
lefthanded; every one could sling stones at an hair breadth, and not
miss. 20:17 And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin, were numbered four
hundred thousand men that drew sword: all these were men of war. 20:18 And the children of Israel arose, and went up to the house of
God, and asked counsel of God, and said, Which of us shall go up first
to the battle against the children of Benjamin? And the LORD said,
Judah shall go up first. 20:19 And the children of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped
against Gibeah. 20:20 And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin; and
the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at
Gibeah. 20:21 And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and
destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites that day twenty and two
thousand men. 20:22 And the people the men of Israel encouraged themselves, and set
their battle again in array in the place where they put themselves in
array the first day. 20:23 (And the children of Israel went up and wept before the LORD
until even, and asked counsel of the LORD, saying, Shall I go up again
to battle against the children of Benjamin my brother? And the LORD
said, Go up against him.) 20:24 And the children of Israel came near
against the children of Benjamin the second day. 20:25 And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second
day, and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again
eighteen thousand men; all these drew the sword. 20:26 Then all the children of Israel, and all the people, went up,
and came unto the house of God, and wept, and sat there before the
LORD, and fasted that day until even, and offered burnt offerings and
peace offerings before the LORD. 20:27 And the children of Israel enquired of the LORD, (for the ark of
the covenant of God was there in those days, 20:28 And Phinehas, the
son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days,)
saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of
Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And the LORD said, Go up; for
to morrow I will deliver them into thine hand. 20:29 And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah. 20:30 And the children of Israel went up against the children of
Benjamin on the third day, and put themselves in array against Gibeah,
as at other times. 20:31 And the children of Benjamin went out against the people, and
were drawn away from the city; and they began to smite of the people,
and kill, as at other times, in the highways, of which one goeth up to
the house of God, and the other to Gibeah in the field, about thirty
men of Israel. 20:32 And the children of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before
us, as at the first. But the children of Israel said, Let us flee, and
draw them from the city unto the highways. 20:33 And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and put
themselves in array at Baaltamar: and the liers in wait of Israel came
forth out of their places, even out of the meadows of Gibeah. 20:34 And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all
Israel, and the battle was sore: but they knew not that evil was near
them. 20:35 And the LORD smote Benjamin before Israel: and the children of
Israel destroyed of the Benjamites that day twenty and five thousand
and an hundred men: all these drew the sword. 20:36 So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten: for the
men of Israel gave place to the Benjamites, because they trusted unto
the liers in wait which they had set beside Gibeah. 20:37 And the liers in wait hasted, and rushed upon Gibeah; and the
liers in wait drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the
edge of the sword. 20:38 Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and
the liers in wait, that they should make a great flame with smoke rise
up out of the city. 20:39 And when the men of Israel retired in the battle, Benjamin began
to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons: for they
said, Surely they are smitten down before us, as in the first battle. 20:40 But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a
pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the
flame of the city ascended up to heaven. 20:41 And when the men of Israel turned again, the men of Benjamin
were amazed: for they saw that evil was come upon them. 20:42 Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel unto
the way of the wilderness; but the battle overtook them; and them
which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of them. 20:43 Thus they inclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them,
and trode them down with ease over against Gibeah toward the
sunrising. 20:44 And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men; all these were
men of valour. 20:45 And they turned and fled toward the wilderness unto the rock of
Rimmon: and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men;
and pursued hard after them unto Gidom, and slew two thousand men of
them. 20:46 So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and five
thousand men that drew the sword; all these were men of valour. 20:47 But six hundred men turned and fled to the wilderness unto the
rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months. 20:48 And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of
Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men
of every city, as the beast, and all that came to hand: also they set
on fire all the cities that they came to. 21:1 Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpeh, saying, There shall
not any of us give his daughter unto Benjamin to wife. 21:2 And the people came to the house of God, and abode there till
even before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept sore; 21:3 And
said, O LORD God of Israel, why is this come to pass in Israel, that
there should be to day one tribe lacking in Israel? 21:4 And it came
to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an
altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. 21:5 And the children of Israel said, Who is there among all the
tribes of Israel that came not up with the congregation unto the LORD? For they had made a great oath concerning him that came not up to the
LORD to Mizpeh, saying, He shall surely be put to death. 21:6 And the children of Israel repented them for Benjamin their
brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day. 21:7 How shall we do for wives for them that remain, seeing we have
sworn by the LORD that we will not give them of our daughters to
wives? 21:8 And they said, What one is there of the tribes of Israel
that came not up to Mizpeh to the LORD? And, behold, there came none
to the camp from Jabeshgilead to the assembly. 21:9 For the people were numbered, and, behold, there were none of the
inhabitants of Jabeshgilead there. 21:10 And the congregation sent thither twelve thousand men of the
valiantest, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants
of Jabeshgilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the
children. 21:11 And this is the thing that ye shall do, Ye shall utterly destroy
every male, and every woman that hath lain by man. 21:12 And they found among the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead four
hundred young virgins, that had known no man by lying with any male:
and they brought them unto the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of
Canaan. 21:13 And the whole congregation sent some to speak to the children of
Benjamin that were in the rock Rimmon, and to call peaceably unto
them. 21:14 And Benjamin came again at that time; and they gave them wives
which they had saved alive of the women of Jabeshgilead: and yet so
they sufficed them not. 21:15 And the people repented them for Benjamin, because that the LORD
had made a breach in the tribes of Israel. 21:16 Then the elders of the congregation said, How shall we do for
wives for them that remain, seeing the women are destroyed out of
Benjamin? 21:17 And they said, There must be an inheritance for them
that be escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not destroyed out of
Israel. 21:18 Howbeit we may not give them wives of our daughters: for the
children of Israel have sworn, saying, Cursed be he that giveth a wife
to Benjamin. 21:19 Then they said, Behold, there is a feast of the LORD in Shiloh
yearly in a place which is on the north side of Bethel, on the east
side of the highway that goeth up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the
south of Lebonah. 21:20 Therefore they commanded the children of Benjamin, saying, Go
and lie in wait in the vineyards; 21:21 And see, and, behold, if the
daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in dances, then come ye out of
the vineyards, and catch you every man his wife of the daughters of
Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin. 21:22 And it shall be, when their fathers or their brethren come unto
us to complain, that we will say unto them, Be favourable unto them
for our sakes: because we reserved not to each man his wife in the
war: for ye did not give unto them at this time, that ye should be
guilty. 21:23 And the children of Benjamin did so, and took them wives,
according to their number, of them that danced, whom they caught: and
they went and returned unto their inheritance, and repaired the
cities, and dwelt in them. 21:24 And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, every
man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from thence
every man to his inheritance. 21:25 In those days there was no king in Israel: every man did that
which was right in his own eyes. The Book of Ruth


1:1 Now it came to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there
was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehemjudah went to
sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons. 1:2 And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife
Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of
Bethlehemjudah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued
there. 1:3 And Elimelech Naomi's husband died; and she was left, and her two
sons. 1:4 And they took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one
was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelled there
about ten years. 1:5 And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was
left of her two sons and her husband. 1:6 Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return
from the country of Moab: for she had heard in the country of Moab how
that the LORD had visited his people in giving them bread. 1:7 Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her
two daughters in law with her; and they went on the way to return unto
the land of Judah. 1:8 And Naomi said unto her two daughters in law, Go, return each to
her mother's house: the LORD deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt
with the dead, and with me. 1:9 The LORD grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house
of her husband. Then she kissed them; and they lifted up their voice,
and wept. 1:10 And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy
people. 1:11 And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters: why will ye go with me? are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your
husbands? 1:12 Turn again, my daughters, go your way; for I am too
old to have an husband. If I should say, I have hope, if I should have
an husband also to night, and should also bear sons; 1:13 Would ye
tarry for them till they were grown? would ye stay for them from
having husbands? nay, my daughters; for it grieveth me much for your
sakes that the hand of the LORD is gone out against me. 1:14 And they lifted up their voice, and wept again: and Orpah kissed
her mother in law; but Ruth clave unto her. 1:15 And she said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her
people, and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law. 1:16 And Ruth said, Intreat me not to leave thee, or to return from
following after thee: for whither thou goest, I will go; and where
thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God
my God: 1:17 Where thou diest, will I die, and there will I be buried:
the LORD do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and
me. 1:18 When she saw that she was stedfastly minded to go with her, then
she left speaking unto her. 1:19 So they two went until they came to Bethlehem. And it came to
pass, when they were come to Bethlehem, that all the city was moved
about them, and they said, Is this Naomi? 1:20 And she said unto
them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the Almighty hath dealt
very bitterly with me. 1:21 I went out full and the LORD hath brought me home again empty:
why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the LORD hath testified against me,
and the Almighty hath afflicted me? 1:22 So Naomi returned, and Ruth
the Moabitess, her daughter in law, with her, which returned out of
the country of Moab: and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of
barley harvest. 2:1 And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth,
of the family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz. 2:2 And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the
field, and glean ears of corn after him in whose sight I shall find
grace. And she said unto her, Go, my daughter. 2:3 And she went, and came, and gleaned in the field after the
reapers: and her hap was to light on a part of the field belonging
unto Boaz, who was of the kindred of Elimelech. 2:4 And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers,
The LORD be with you. And they answered him, The LORD bless thee. 2:5 Then said Boaz unto his servant that was set over the reapers,
Whose damsel is this? 2:6 And the servant that was set over the
reapers answered and said, It is the Moabitish damsel that came back
with Naomi out of the country of Moab: 2:7 And she said, I pray you,
let me glean and gather after the reapers among the sheaves: so she
came, and hath continued even from the morning until now, that she
tarried a little in the house. 2:8 Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to
glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by
my maidens: 2:9 Let thine eyes be on the field that they do reap, and
go thou after them: have I not charged the young men that they shall
not touch thee? and when thou art athirst, go unto the vessels, and
drink of that which the young men have drawn. 2:10 Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and
said unto him, Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou
shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger? 2:11 And Boaz
answered and said unto her, It hath fully been shewed me, all that
thou hast done unto thy mother in law since the death of thine
husband: and how thou hast left thy father and thy mother, and the
land of thy nativity, and art come unto a people which thou knewest
not heretofore. 2:12 The LORD recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of
the LORD God of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust. 2:13 Then she said, Let me find favour in thy sight, my lord; for that
thou hast comforted me, and for that thou hast spoken friendly unto
thine handmaid, though I be not like unto one of thine handmaidens. 2:14 And Boaz said unto her, At mealtime come thou hither, and eat of
the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the
reapers: and he reached her parched corn, and she did eat, and was
sufficed, and left. 2:15 And when she was risen up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men,
saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and reproach her not:
2:16 And let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her, and
leave them, that she may glean them, and rebuke her not. 2:17 So she gleaned in the field until even, and beat out that she had
gleaned: and it was about an ephah of barley. 2:18 And she took it up, and went into the city: and her mother in law
saw what she had gleaned: and she brought forth, and gave to her that
she had reserved after she was sufficed. 2:19 And her mother in law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to
day? and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge
of thee. And she shewed her mother in law with whom she had wrought,
and said, The man's name with whom I wrought to day is Boaz. 2:20 And Naomi said unto her daughter in law, Blessed be he of the
LORD, who hath not left off his kindness to the living and to the
dead. And Naomi said unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of
our next kinsmen. 2:21 And Ruth the Moabitess said, He said unto me also, Thou shalt
keep fast by my young men, until they have ended all my harvest. 2:22 And Naomi said unto Ruth her daughter in law, It is good, my
daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, that they meet thee not
in any other field. 2:23 So she kept fast by the maidens of Boaz to glean unto the end of
barley harvest and of wheat harvest; and dwelt with her mother in law. 3:1 Then Naomi her mother in law said unto her, My daughter, shall I
not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee? 3:2 And now is
not Boaz of our kindred, with whose maidens thou wast? Behold, he
winnoweth barley to night in the threshingfloor. 3:3 Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon
thee, and get thee down to the floor: but make not thyself known unto
the man, until he shall have done eating and drinking. 3:4 And it shall be, when he lieth down, that thou shalt mark the
place where he shall lie, and thou shalt go in, and uncover his feet,
and lay thee down; and he will tell thee what thou shalt do. 3:5 And she said unto her, All that thou sayest unto me I will do. 3:6 And she went down unto the floor, and did according to all that
her mother in law bade her. 3:7 And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he
went to lie down at the end of the heap of corn: and she came softly,
and uncovered his feet, and laid her down. 3:8 And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was afraid, and
turned himself: and, behold, a woman lay at his feet. 3:9 And he said, Who art thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thine
handmaid: spread therefore thy skirt over thine handmaid; for thou art
a near kinsman. 3:10 And he said, Blessed be thou of the LORD, my daughter: for thou
hast shewed more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning,
inasmuch as thou followedst not young men, whether poor or rich. 3:11 And now, my daughter, fear not; I will do to thee all that thou
requirest: for all the city of my people doth know that thou art a
virtuous woman. 3:12 And now it is true that I am thy near kinsman: howbeit there is a
kinsman nearer than I. 3:13 Tarry this night, and it shall be in the morning, that if he will
perform unto thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the
kinsman's part: but if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee,
then will I do the part of a kinsman to thee, as the LORD liveth: lie
down until the morning. 3:14 And she lay at his feet until the morning: and she rose up before
one could know another. And he said, Let it not be known that a woman
came into the floor. 3:15 Also he said, Bring the vail that thou hast upon thee, and hold
it. And when she held it, he measured six measures of barley, and laid it
on her: and she went into the city. 3:16 And when she came to her mother in law, she said, Who art thou,
my daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her. 3:17 And she said, These six measures of barley gave he me; for he
said to me, Go not empty unto thy mother in law. 3:18 Then said she, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the
matter will fall: for the man will not be in rest, until he have
finished the thing this day. 4:1 Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there: and,
behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; unto whom he said, Ho,
such a one! turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat
down. 4:2 And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye
down here. And they sat down. 4:3 And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the
country of Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was our brother
Elimelech's: 4:4 And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy it
before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou
wilt redeem it, redeem it: but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell
me, that I may know: for there is none to redeem it beside thee; and I
am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it. 4:5 Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of
Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the
dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance. 4:6 And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar
mine own inheritance: redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot
redeem it. 4:7 Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning
redeeming and concerning changing, for to confirm all things; a man
plucked off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbour: and this was a
testimony in Israel. 4:8 Therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, Buy it for thee. So he drew
off his shoe. 4:9 And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people, Ye are
witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and
all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, of the hand of Naomi. 4:10 Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased
to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance,
that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and
from the gate of his place: ye are witnesses this day. 4:11 And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said,
We are witnesses. The LORD make the woman that is come into thine
house like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of
Israel: and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem:
4:12 And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare
unto Judah, of the seed which the LORD shall give thee of this young
woman. 4:13 So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife: and when he went in unto
her, the LORD gave her conception, and she bare a son. 4:14 And the women said unto Naomi, Blessed be the LORD, which hath
not left thee this day without a kinsman, that his name may be famous
in Israel. 4:15 And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life, and a nourisher
of thine old age: for thy daughter in law, which loveth thee, which is
better to thee than seven sons, hath born him. 4:16 And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became
nurse unto it. 4:17 And the women her neighbours gave it a name, saying, There is a
son born to Naomi; and they called his name Obed: he is the father of
Jesse, the father of David. 4:18 Now these are the generations of Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron,
4:19 And Hezron begat Ram, and Ram begat Amminadab, 4:20 And Amminadab
begat Nahshon, and Nahshon begat Salmon, 4:21 And Salmon begat Boaz,
and Boaz begat Obed, 4:22 And Obed begat Jesse, and Jesse begat David. The First Book of Samuel

Otherwise Called:

The First Book of the Kings


1:1 Now there was a certain man of Ramathaimzophim, of mount Ephraim,
and his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the
son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephrathite: 1:2 And he had two wives;
the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah:
and Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children. 1:3 And this man went up out of his city yearly to worship and to
sacrifice unto the LORD of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli,
Hophni and Phinehas, the priests of the LORD, were there. 1:4 And when the time was that Elkanah offered, he gave to Peninnah
his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions: 1:5 But
unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion; for he loved Hannah: but the
LORD had shut up her womb. 1:6 And her adversary also provoked her sore, for to make her fret,
because the LORD had shut up her womb. 1:7 And as he did so year by year, when she went up to the house of
the LORD, so she provoked her; therefore she wept, and did not eat. 1:8 Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why is thy heart grieved? am not I better
to thee than ten sons? 1:9 So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in
Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest sat upon a seat
by a post of the temple of the LORD. 1:10 And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed unto the LORD, and
wept sore. 1:11 And she vowed a vow, and said, O LORD of hosts, if thou wilt
indeed look on the affliction of thine handmaid, and remember me, and
not forget thine handmaid, but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man
child, then I will give him unto the LORD all the days of his life,
and there shall no razor come upon his head. 1:12 And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the LORD,
that Eli marked her mouth. 1:13 Now Hannah, she spake in her heart; only her lips moved, but her
voice was not heard: therefore Eli thought she had been drunken. 1:14 And Eli said unto her, How long wilt thou be drunken? put away
thy wine from thee. 1:15 And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a
sorrowful spirit: I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but have
poured out my soul before the LORD. 1:16 Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial: for out of the
abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken hitherto. 1:17 Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace: and the God of Israel
grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of him. 1:18 And she said, Let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight. So the
woman went her way, and did eat, and her countenance was no more sad. 1:19 And they rose up in the morning early, and worshipped before the
LORD, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah: and Elkanah knew
Hannah his wife; and the LORD remembered her. 1:20 Wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about after
Hannah had conceived, that she bare a son, and called his name Samuel,
saying, Because I have asked him of the LORD. 1:21 And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer unto the
LORD the yearly sacrifice, and his vow. 1:22 But Hannah went not up; for she said unto her husband, I will not
go up until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he
may appear before the LORD, and there abide for ever. 1:23 And Elkanah her husband said unto her, Do what seemeth thee good;
tarry until thou have weaned him; only the LORD establish his word. So
the woman abode, and gave her son suck until she weaned him. 1:24 And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three
bullocks, and one ephah of flour, and a bottle of wine, and brought
him unto the house of the LORD in Shiloh: and the child was young. 1:25 And they slew a bullock, and brought the child to Eli. 1:26 And she said, Oh my lord, as thy soul liveth, my lord, I am the
woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the LORD. 1:27 For this child I prayed; and the LORD hath given me my petition
which I asked of him: 1:28 Therefore also I have lent him to the LORD;
as long as he liveth he shall be lent to the LORD. And he worshipped
the LORD there. 2:1 And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoiceth in the LORD, mine
horn is exalted in the LORD: my mouth is enlarged over mine enemies;
because I rejoice in thy salvation. 2:2 There is none holy as the LORD: for there is none beside thee:
neither is there any rock like our God. 2:3 Talk no more so exceeding proudly; let not arrogancy come out of
your mouth: for the LORD is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are
weighed. 2:4 The bows of the mighty men are broken, and they that stumbled are
girded with strength. 2:5 They that were full have hired out themselves for bread; and they
that were hungry ceased: so that the barren hath born seven; and she
that hath many children is waxed feeble. 2:6 The LORD killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave,
and bringeth up. 2:7 The LORD maketh poor, and maketh rich: he bringeth low, and
lifteth up. 2:8 He raiseth up the poor out of the dust, and lifteth up the beggar
from the dunghill, to set them among princes, and to make them inherit
the throne of glory: for the pillars of the earth are the LORD's, and
he hath set the world upon them. 2:9 He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall be
silent in darkness; for by strength shall no man prevail. 2:10 The adversaries of the LORD shall be broken to pieces; out of
heaven shall he thunder upon them: the LORD shall judge the ends of
the earth; and he shall give strength unto his king, and exalt the
horn of his anointed. 2:11 And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house. And the child did
minister unto the LORD before Eli the priest. 2:12 Now the sons of Eli were sons of Belial; they knew not the LORD. 2:13 And the priest's custom with the people was, that, when any man
offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was in
seething, with a fleshhook of three teeth in his hand; 2:14 And he
struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot; all that the
fleshhook brought up the priest took for himself. So they did in
Shiloh unto all the Israelites that came thither. 2:15 Also before they burnt the fat, the priest's servant came, and
said to the man that sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest;
for he will not have sodden flesh of thee, but raw. 2:16 And if any man said unto him, Let them not fail to burn the fat
presently, and then take as much as thy soul desireth; then he would
answer him, Nay; but thou shalt give it me now: and if not, I will
take it by force. 2:17 Wherefore the sin of the young men was very great before the
LORD: for men abhorred the offering of the LORD. 2:18 But Samuel ministered before the LORD, being a child, girded with
a linen ephod. 2:19 Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him
from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the
yearly sacrifice. 2:20 And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, The LORD give
thee seed of this woman for the loan which is lent to the LORD. And
they went unto their own home. 2:21 And the LORD visited Hannah, so that she conceived, and bare
three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before the
LORD. 2:22 Now Eli was very old, and heard all that his sons did unto all
Israel; and how they lay with the women that assembled at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation. 2:23 And he said unto them, Why do ye such things? for I hear of your
evil dealings by all this people. 2:24 Nay, my sons; for it is no good report that I hear: ye make the
LORD's people to transgress. 2:25 If one man sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if
a man sin against the LORD, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstanding
they hearkened not unto the voice of their father, because the LORD
would slay them. 2:26 And the child Samuel grew on, and was in favour both with the
LORD, and also with men. 2:27 And there came a man of God unto Eli, and said unto him, Thus
saith the LORD, Did I plainly appear unto the house of thy father,
when they were in Egypt in Pharaoh's house? 2:28 And did I choose him
out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to offer upon mine
altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? and did I give
unto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the
children of Israel? 2:29 Wherefore kick ye at my sacrifice and at
mine offering, which I have commanded in my habitation; and honourest
thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chiefest of all the
offerings of Israel my people? 2:30 Wherefore the LORD God of Israel
saith, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father,
should walk before me for ever: but now the LORD saith, Be it far from
me; for them that honour me I will honour, and they that despise me
shall be lightly esteemed. 2:31 Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm
of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thine
house. 2:32 And thou shalt see an enemy in my habitation, in all the wealth
which God shall give Israel: and there shall not be an old man in
thine house for ever. 2:33 And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from mine altar,
shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thine heart: and all the
increase of thine house shall die in the flower of their age. 2:34 And this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall come upon thy two
sons, on Hophni and Phinehas; in one day they shall die both of them. 2:35 And I will raise me up a faithful priest, that shall do according
to that which is in mine heart and in my mind: and I will build him a
sure house; and he shall walk before mine anointed for ever. 2:36 And it shall come to pass, that every one that is left in thine
house shall come and crouch to him for a piece of silver and a morsel
of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests'
offices, that I may eat a piece of bread. 3:1 And the child Samuel ministered unto the LORD before Eli. And the
word of the LORD was precious in those days; there was no open vision. 3:2 And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his
place, and his eyes began to wax dim, that he could not see; 3:3 And
ere the lamp of God went out in the temple of the LORD, where the ark
of God was, and Samuel was laid down to sleep; 3:4 That the LORD
called Samuel: and he answered, Here am I. 3:5 And he ran unto Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou calledst me. And he said, I called not; lie down again. And he went and lay down. 3:6 And the LORD called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went
to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And he answered,
I called not, my son; lie down again. 3:7 Now Samuel did not yet know the LORD, neither was the word of the
LORD yet revealed unto him. 3:8 And the LORD called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and
went to Eli, and said, Here am I; for thou didst call me. And Eli
perceived that the LORD had called the child. 3:9 Therefore Eli said unto Samuel, Go, lie down: and it shall be, if
he call thee, that thou shalt say, Speak, LORD; for thy servant
heareth. So Samuel went and lay down in his place. 3:10 And the LORD came, and stood, and called as at other times,
Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel answered, Speak; for thy servant heareth. 3:11 And the LORD said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel,
at which both the ears of every one that heareth it shall tingle. 3:12 In that day I will perform against Eli all things which I have
spoken concerning his house: when I begin, I will also make an end. 3:13 For I have told him that I will judge his house for ever for the
iniquity which he knoweth; because his sons made themselves vile, and
he restrained them not. 3:14 And therefore I have sworn unto the house of Eli, that the
iniquity of Eli's house shall not be purged with sacrifice nor
offering for ever. 3:15 And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the
house of the LORD. And Samuel feared to shew Eli the vision. 3:16 Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he
answered, Here am I. 3:17 And he said, What is the thing that the LORD hath said unto thee? I pray thee hide it not from me: God do so to thee, and more also, if
thou hide any thing from me of all the things that he said unto thee. 3:18 And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he
said, It is the LORD: let him do what seemeth him good. 3:19 And Samuel grew, and the LORD was with him, and did let none of
his words fall to the ground. 3:20 And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was
established to be a prophet of the LORD. 3:21 And the LORD appeared again in Shiloh: for the LORD revealed
himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of the LORD. 4:1 And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out
against the Philistines to battle, and pitched beside Ebenezer: and
the Philistines pitched in Aphek. 4:2 And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel: and
when they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines:
and they slew of the army in the field about four thousand men. 4:3 And when the people were come into the camp, the elders of Israel
said, Wherefore hath the LORD smitten us to day before the
Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of the LORD out of
Shiloh unto us, that, when it cometh among us, it may save us out of
the hand of our enemies. 4:4 So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring from thence
the ark of the covenant of the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth between
the cherubims: and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were
there with the ark of the covenant of God. 4:5 And when the ark of the covenant of the LORD came into the camp,
all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again. 4:6 And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said,
What meaneth the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews? And they understood that the ark of the LORD was come into the camp. 4:7 And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God is come into
the camp. And they said, Woe unto us! for there hath not been such a
thing heretofore. 4:8 Woe unto us! who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty
Gods? these are the Gods that smote the Egyptians with all the plagues
in the wilderness. 4:9 Be strong and quit yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye
be not servants unto the Hebrews, as they have been to you: quit
yourselves like men, and fight. 4:10 And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled
every man into his tent: and there was a very great slaughter; for
there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen. 4:11 And the ark of God was taken; and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and
Phinehas, were slain. 4:12 And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to
Shiloh the same day with his clothes rent, and with earth upon his
head. 4:13 And when he came, lo, Eli sat upon a seat by the wayside
watching: for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man
came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out. 4:14 And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What meaneth
the noise of this tumult? And the man came in hastily, and told Eli. 4:15 Now Eli was ninety and eight years old; and his eyes were dim,
that he could not see. 4:16 And the man said unto Eli, I am he that came out of the army, and
I fled to day out of the army. And he said, What is there done, my
son? 4:17 And the messenger answered and said, Israel is fled before
the Philistines, and there hath been also a great slaughter among the
people, and thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the
ark of God is taken. 4:18 And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that
he fell from off the seat backward by the side of the gate, and his
neck brake, and he died: for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had
judged Israel forty years. 4:19 And his daughter in law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to
be delivered: and when she heard the tidings that the ark of God was
taken, and that her father in law and her husband were dead, she bowed
herself and travailed; for her pains came upon her. 4:20 And about the time of her death the women that stood by her said
unto her, Fear not; for thou hast born a son. But she answered not,
neither did she regard it. 4:21 And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory is departed
from Israel: because the ark of God was taken, and because of her
father in law and her husband. 4:22 And she said, The glory is departed from Israel: for the ark of
God is taken. 5:1 And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it from
Ebenezer unto Ashdod. 5:2 When the Philistines took the ark of God, they brought it into the
house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon. 5:3 And when they of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon
was fallen upon his face to the earth before the ark of the LORD. And
they took Dagon, and set him in his place again. 5:4 And when they arose early on the morrow morning, behold, Dagon was
fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of the LORD; and the
head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands were cut off upon the
threshold; only the stump of Dagon was left to him. 5:5 Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any that come into
Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod unto this
day. 5:6 But the hand of the LORD was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he
destroyed them, and smote them with emerods, even Ashdod and the
coasts thereof. 5:7 And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark
of the God of Israel shall not abide with us: for his hand is sore
upon us, and upon Dagon our god. 5:8 They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines
unto them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of
Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried
about unto Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel about
thither. 5:9 And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of
the LORD was against the city with a very great destruction: and he
smote the men of the city, both small and great, and they had emerods
in their secret parts. 5:10 Therefore they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass,
as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying,
They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to slay us
and our people. 5:11 So they sent and gathered together all the lords of the
Philistines, and said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let
it go again to his own place, that it slay us not, and our people: for
there was a deadly destruction throughout all the city; the hand of
God was very heavy there. 5:12 And the men that died not were smitten with the emerods: and the
cry of the city went up to heaven. 6:1 And the ark of the LORD was in the country of the Philistines
seven months. 6:2 And the Philistines called for the priests and the diviners,
saying, What shall we do to the ark of the LORD? tell us wherewith we
shall send it to his place. 6:3 And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, send
it not empty; but in any wise return him a trespass offering: then ye
shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not
removed from you. 6:4 Then said they, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall
return to him? They answered, Five golden emerods, and five golden
mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines: for one
plague was on you all, and on your lords. 6:5 Wherefore ye shall make images of your emerods, and images of your
mice that mar the land; and ye shall give glory unto the God of
Israel: peradventure he will lighten his hand from off you, and from
off your gods, and from off your land. 6:6 Wherefore then do ye harden your hearts, as the Egyptians and
Pharaoh hardened their hearts? when he had wrought wonderfully among
them, did they not let the people go, and they departed? 6:7 Now
therefore make a new cart, and take two milch kine, on which there
hath come no yoke, and tie the kine to the cart, and bring their
calves home from them: 6:8 And take the ark of the LORD, and lay it
upon the cart; and put the jewels of gold, which ye return him for a
trespass offering, in a coffer by the side thereof; and send it away,
that it may go. 6:9 And see, if it goeth up by the way of his own coast to
Bethshemesh, then he hath done us this great evil: but if not, then we
shall know that it is not his hand that smote us: it was a chance that
happened to us. 6:10 And the men did so; and took two milch kine, and tied them to the
cart, and shut up their calves at home: 6:11 And they laid the ark of
the LORD upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the
images of their emerods. 6:12 And the kine took the straight way to the way of Bethshemesh, and
went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to
the right hand or to the left; and the lords of the Philistines went
after them unto the border of Bethshemesh. 6:13 And they of Bethshemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the
valley: and they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced
to see it. 6:14 And the cart came into the field of Joshua, a Bethshemite, and
stood there, where there was a great stone: and they clave the wood of
the cart, and offered the kine a burnt offering unto the LORD. 6:15 And the Levites took down the ark of the LORD, and the coffer
that was with it, wherein the jewels of gold were, and put them on the
great stone: and the men of Bethshemesh offered burnt offerings and
sacrificed sacrifices the same day unto the LORD. 6:16 And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they
returned to Ekron the same day. 6:17 And these are the golden emerods which the Philistines returned
for a trespass offering unto the LORD; for Ashdod one, for Gaza one,
for Askelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one; 6:18 And the golden
mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines
belonging to the five lords, both of fenced cities, and of country
villages, even unto the great stone of Abel, whereon they set down the
ark of the LORD: which stone remaineth unto this day in the field of
Joshua, the Bethshemite. 6:19 And he smote the men of Bethshemesh, because they had looked into
the ark of the LORD, even he smote of the people fifty thousand and
threescore and ten men: and the people lamented, because the LORD had
smitten many of the people with a great slaughter. 6:20 And the men of Bethshemesh said, Who is able to stand before this
holy LORD God? and to whom shall he go up from us? 6:21 And they sent
messengers to the inhabitants of Kirjathjearim, saying, The
Philistines have brought again the ark of the LORD; come ye down, and
fetch it up to you. 7:1 And the men of Kirjathjearim came, and fetched up the ark of the
LORD, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and
sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the LORD. 7:2 And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim, that
the time was long; for it was twenty years: and all the house of
Israel lamented after the LORD. 7:3 And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do
return unto the LORD with all your hearts, then put away the strange
gods and Ashtaroth from among you, and prepare your hearts unto the
LORD, and serve him only: and he will deliver you out of the hand of
the Philistines. 7:4 Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth, and
served the LORD only. 7:5 And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpeh, and I will pray for
you unto the LORD. 7:6 And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and drew water, and poured
it out before the LORD, and fasted on that day, and said there, We
have sinned against the LORD. And Samuel judged the children of Israel
in Mizpeh. 7:7 And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were
gathered together to Mizpeh, the lords of the Philistines went up
against Israel. And when the children of Israel heard it, they were
afraid of the Philistines. 7:8 And the children of Israel said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto
the LORD our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the
Philistines. 7:9 And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a burnt
offering wholly unto the LORD: and Samuel cried unto the LORD for
Israel; and the LORD heard him. 7:10 And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines
drew near to battle against Israel: but the LORD thundered with a
great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them;
and they were smitten before Israel. 7:11 And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued the
Philistines, and smote them, until they came under Bethcar. 7:12 Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and
called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto hath the LORD helped
us. 7:13 So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more into the
coast of Israel: and the hand of the LORD was against the Philistines
all the days of Samuel. 7:14 And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were
restored to Israel, from Ekron even unto Gath; and the coasts thereof
did Israel deliver out of the hands of the Philistines. And there was
peace between Israel and the Amorites. 7:15 And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. 7:16 And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal,
and Mizpeh, and judged Israel in all those places. 7:17 And his return was to Ramah; for there was his house; and there
he judged Israel; and there he built an altar unto the LORD. 8:1 And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons
judges over Israel. 8:2 Now the name of his firstborn was Joel; and the name of his
second, Abiah: they were judges in Beersheba. 8:3 And his sons walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre,
and took bribes, and perverted judgment. 8:4 Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and
came to Samuel unto Ramah, 8:5 And said unto him, Behold, thou art
old, and thy sons walk not in thy ways: now make us a king to judge us
like all the nations. 8:6 But the thing displeased Samuel, when they said, Give us a king to
judge us. And Samuel prayed unto the LORD. 8:7 And the LORD said unto Samuel, Hearken unto the voice of the
people in all that they say unto thee: for they have not rejected
thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over them. 8:8 According to all the works which they have done since the day that
I brought them up out of Egypt even unto this day, wherewith they have
forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also unto thee. 8:9 Now therefore hearken unto their voice: howbeit yet protest
solemnly unto them, and shew them the manner of the king that shall
reign over them. 8:10 And Samuel told all the words of the LORD unto the people that
asked of him a king. 8:11 And he said, This will be the manner of the king that shall reign
over you: He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself, for
his chariots, and to be his horsemen; and some shall run before his
chariots. 8:12 And he will appoint him captains over thousands, and captains
over fifties; and will set them to ear his ground, and to reap his
harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and instruments of his
chariots. 8:13 And he will take your daughters to be confectionaries, and to be
cooks, and to be bakers. 8:14 And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your
oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants. 8:15 And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards,
and give to his officers, and to his servants. 8:16 And he will take your menservants, and your maidservants, and
your goodliest young men, and your asses, and put them to his work. 8:17 He will take the tenth of your sheep: and ye shall be his
servants. 8:18 And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king which ye
shall have chosen you; and the LORD will not hear you in that day. 8:19 Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel; and
they said, Nay; but we will have a king over us; 8:20 That we also may
be like all the nations; and that our king may judge us, and go out
before us, and fight our battles. 8:21 And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he rehearsed
them in the ears of the LORD. 8:22 And the LORD said to Samuel, Hearken unto their voice, and make
them a king. And Samuel said unto the men of Israel, Go ye every man
unto his city. 9:1 Now there was a man of Benjamin, whose name was Kish, the son of
Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a
Benjamite, a mighty man of power. 9:2 And he had a son, whose name was Saul, a choice young man, and a
goodly: and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier
person than he: from his shoulders and upward he was higher than any
of the people. 9:3 And the asses of Kish Saul's father were lost. And Kish said to
Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go
seek the asses. 9:4 And he passed through mount Ephraim, and passed through the land
of Shalisha, but they found them not: then they passed through the
land of Shalim, and there they were not: and he passed through the
land of the Benjamites, but they found them not. 9:5 And when they were come to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his
servant that was with him, Come, and let us return; lest my father
leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us. 9:6 And he said unto him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of
God, and he is an honourable man; all that he saith cometh surely to
pass: now let us go thither; peradventure he can shew us our way that
we should go. 9:7 Then said Saul to his servant, But, behold, if we go, what shall
we bring the man? for the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is
not a present to bring to the man of God: what have we? 9:8 And the
servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have here at hand the
fourth part of a shekel of silver: that will I give to the man of God,
to tell us our way. 9:9 (Beforetime in Israel, when a man went to enquire of God, thus he
spake, Come, and let us go to the seer: for he that is now called a
Prophet was beforetime called a Seer.) 9:10 Then said Saul to his
servant, Well said; come, let us go. So they went unto the city where
the man of God was. 9:11 And as they went up the hill to the city, they found young
maidens going out to draw water, and said unto them, Is the seer here? 9:12 And they answered them, and said, He is; behold, he is before
you: make haste now, for he came to day to the city; for there is a
sacrifice of the people to day in the high place: 9:13 As soon as ye
be come into the city, ye shall straightway find him, before he go up
to the high place to eat: for the people will not eat until he come,
because he doth bless the sacrifice; and afterwards they eat that be
bidden. Now therefore get you up; for about this time ye shall find
him. 9:14 And they went up into the city: and when they were come into the
city, behold, Samuel came out against them, for to go up to the high
place. 9:15 Now the LORD had told Samuel in his ear a day before Saul came,
saying, 9:16 To morrow about this time I will send thee a man out of
the land of Benjamin, and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my
people Israel, that he may save my people out of the hand of the
Philistines: for I have looked upon my people, because their cry is
come unto me. 9:17 And when Samuel saw Saul, the LORD said unto him, Behold the man
whom I spake to thee of! this same shall reign over my people. 9:18 Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I
pray thee, where the seer's house is. 9:19 And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer: go up before
me unto the high place; for ye shall eat with me to day, and to morrow
I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thine heart. 9:20 And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago, set not thy
mind on them; for they are found. And on whom is all the desire of
Israel? Is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house? 9:21 And
Saul answered and said, Am not I a Benjamite, of the smallest of the
tribes of Israel? and my family the least of all the families of the
tribe of Benjamin? wherefore then speakest thou so to me? 9:22 And
Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the parlour,
and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden,
which were about thirty persons. 9:23 And Samuel said unto the cook, Bring the portion which I gave
thee, of which I said unto thee, Set it by thee. 9:24 And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it,
and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold that which is left! set it before thee, and eat: for unto this time hath it been kept for
thee since I said, I have invited the people. So Saul did eat with
Samuel that day. 9:25 And when they were come down from the high place into the city,
Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house. 9:26 And they arose early: and it came to pass about the spring of the
day, that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house, saying, Up, that
I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them,
he and Samuel, abroad. 9:27 And as they were going down to the end of the city, Samuel said
to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us, (and he passed on), but
stand thou still a while, that I may shew thee the word of God. 10:1 Then Samuel took a vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and
kissed him, and said, Is it not because the LORD hath anointed thee to
be captain over his inheritance? 10:2 When thou art departed from me
to day, then thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre in the
border of Benjamin at Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses
which thou wentest to seek are found: and, lo, thy father hath left
the care of the asses, and sorroweth for you, saying, What shall I do
for my son? 10:3 Then shalt thou go on forward from thence, and thou
shalt come to the plain of Tabor, and there shall meet thee three men
going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another
carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine:
10:4 And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread;
which thou shalt receive of their hands. 10:5 After that thou shalt come to the hill of God, where is the
garrison of the Philistines: and it shall come to pass, when thou art
come thither to the city, that thou shalt meet a company of prophets
coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a
pipe, and a harp, before them; and they shall prophesy: 10:6 And the
Spirit of the LORD will come upon thee, and thou shalt prophesy with
them, and shalt be turned into another man. 10:7 And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee, that thou do
as occasion serve thee; for God is with thee. 10:8 And thou shalt go down before me to Gilgal; and, behold, I will
come down unto thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice
sacrifices of peace offerings: seven days shalt thou tarry, till I
come to thee, and shew thee what thou shalt do. 10:9 And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from
Samuel, God gave him another heart: and all those signs came to pass
that day. 10:10 And when they came thither to the hill, behold, a company of
prophets met him; and the Spirit of God came upon him, and he
prophesied among them. 10:11 And it came to pass, when all that knew him beforetime saw that,
behold, he prophesied among the prophets, then the people said one to
another, What is this that is come unto the son of Kish? Is Saul also
among the prophets? 10:12 And one of the same place answered and
said, But who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul
also among the prophets? 10:13 And when he had made an end of
prophesying, he came to the high place. 10:14 And Saul's uncle said unto him and to his servant, Whither went
ye? And he said, To seek the asses: and when we saw that they were no
where, we came to Samuel. 10:15 And Saul's uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said
unto you. 10:16 And Saul said unto his uncle, He told us plainly that the asses
were found. But of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he
told him not. 10:17 And Samuel called the people together unto the LORD to Mizpeh;
10:18 And said unto the children of Israel, Thus saith the LORD God of
Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and delivered you out of the
hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of
them that oppressed you: 10:19 And ye have this day rejected your God,
who himself saved you out of all your adversities and your
tribulations; and ye have said unto him, Nay, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before the LORD by your tribes, and
by your thousands. 10:20 And when Samuel had caused all the tribes of Israel to come
near, the tribe of Benjamin was taken. 10:21 When he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their
families, the family of Matri was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was
taken: and when they sought him, he could not be found. 10:22 Therefore they enquired of the LORD further, if the man should
yet come thither. And the LORD answered, Behold he hath hid himself
among the stuff. 10:23 And they ran and fetched him thence: and when he stood among the
people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and
upward. 10:24 And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom the LORD hath
chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the
people shouted, and said, God save the king. 10:25 Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote
it in a book, and laid it up before the LORD. And Samuel sent all the
people away, every man to his house. 10:26 And Saul also went home to Gibeah; and there went with him a
band of men, whose hearts God had touched. 10:27 But the children of Belial said, How shall this man save us? And
they despised him, and brought no presents. But he held his peace. 11:1 Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against
Jabeshgilead: and all the men of Jabesh said unto Nahash, Make a
covenant with us, and we will serve thee. 11:2 And Nahash the Ammonite answered them, On this condition will I
make a covenant with you, that I may thrust out all your right eyes,
and lay it for a reproach upon all Israel. 11:3 And the elders of Jabesh said unto him, Give us seven days'
respite, that we may send messengers unto all the coasts of Israel:
and then, if there be no man to save us, we will come out to thee. 11:4 Then came the messengers to Gibeah of Saul, and told the tidings
in the ears of the people: and all the people lifted up their voices,
and wept. 11:5 And, behold, Saul came after the herd out of the field; and Saul
said, What aileth the people that they weep? And they told him the
tidings of the men of Jabesh. 11:6 And the Spirit of God came upon Saul when he heard those tidings,
and his anger was kindled greatly. 11:7 And he took a yoke of oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent
them throughout all the coasts of Israel by the hands of messengers,
saying, Whosoever cometh not forth after Saul and after Samuel, so
shall it be done unto his oxen. And the fear of the LORD fell on the
people, and they came out with one consent. 11:8 And when he numbered them in Bezek, the children of Israel were
three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand. 11:9 And they said unto the messengers that came, Thus shall ye say
unto the men of Jabeshgilead, To morrow, by that time the sun be hot,
ye shall have help. And the messengers came and shewed it to the men
of Jabesh; and they were glad. 11:10 Therefore the men of Jabesh said, To morrow we will come out
unto you, and ye shall do with us all that seemeth good unto you. 11:11 And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three
companies; and they came into the midst of the host in the morning
watch, and slew the Ammonites until the heat of the day: and it came
to pass, that they which remained were scattered, so that two of them
were not left together. 11:12 And the people said unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul
reign over us? bring the men, that we may put them to death. 11:13 And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day:
for to day the LORD hath wrought salvation in Israel. 11:14 Then said Samuel to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal,
and renew the kingdom there. 11:15 And all the people went to Gilgal; and there they made Saul king
before the LORD in Gilgal; and there they sacrificed sacrifices of
peace offerings before the LORD; and there Saul and all the men of
Israel rejoiced greatly. 12:1 And Samuel said unto all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened unto
your voice in all that ye said unto me, and have made a king over you. 12:2 And now, behold, the king walketh before you: and I am old and
grayheaded; and, behold, my sons are with you: and I have walked
before you from my childhood unto this day. 12:3 Behold, here I am: witness against me before the LORD, and before
his anointed: whose ox have I taken? or whose ass have I taken? or
whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I
received any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it
you. 12:4 And they said, Thou hast not defrauded us, nor oppressed us,
neither hast thou taken ought of any man's hand. 12:5 And he said unto them, The LORD is witness against you, and his
anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found ought in my hand. And they answered, He is witness. 12:6 And Samuel said unto the people, It is the LORD that advanced
Moses and Aaron, and that brought your fathers up out of the land of
Egypt. 12:7 Now therefore stand still, that I may reason with you before the
LORD of all the righteous acts of the LORD, which he did to you and to
your fathers. 12:8 When Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the
LORD, then the LORD sent Moses and Aaron, which brought forth your
fathers out of Egypt, and made them dwell in this place. 12:9 And when they forgat the LORD their God, he sold them into the
hand of Sisera, captain of the host of Hazor, and into the hand of the
Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought
against them. 12:10 And they cried unto the LORD, and said, We have sinned, because
we have forsaken the LORD, and have served Baalim and Ashtaroth: but
now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee. 12:11 And the LORD sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and
Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every
side, and ye dwelled safe. 12:12 And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the children of Ammon
came against you, ye said unto me, Nay; but a king shall reign over
us: when the LORD your God was your king. 12:13 Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye
have desired! and, behold, the LORD hath set a king over you. 12:14 If ye will fear the LORD, and serve him, and obey his voice, and
not rebel against the commandment of the LORD, then shall both ye and
also the king that reigneth over you continue following the LORD your
God: 12:15 But if ye will not obey the voice of the LORD, but rebel
against the commandment of the LORD, then shall the hand of the LORD
be against you, as it was against your fathers. 12:16 Now therefore stand and see this great thing, which the LORD
will do before your eyes. 12:17 Is it not wheat harvest to day? I will call unto the LORD, and
he shall send thunder and rain; that ye may perceive and see that your
wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of the LORD, in
asking you a king. 12:18 So Samuel called unto the LORD; and the LORD sent thunder and
rain that day: and all the people greatly feared the LORD and Samuel. 12:19 And all the people said unto Samuel, Pray for thy servants unto
the LORD thy God, that we die not: for we have added unto all our sins
this evil, to ask us a king. 12:20 And Samuel said unto the people, Fear not: ye have done all this
wickedness: yet turn not aside from following the LORD, but serve the
LORD with all your heart; 12:21 And turn ye not aside: for then should
ye go after vain things, which cannot profit nor deliver; for they are
vain. 12:22 For the LORD will not forsake his people for his great name's
sake: because it hath pleased the LORD to make you his people. 12:23 Moreover as for me, God forbid that I should sin against the
LORD in ceasing to pray for you: but I will teach you the good and the
right way: 12:24 Only fear the LORD, and serve him in truth with all
your heart: for consider how great things he hath done for you. 12:25 But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye
and your king. 13:1 Saul reigned one year; and when he had reigned two years over
Israel, 13:2 Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel; whereof two
thousand were with Saul in Michmash and in mount Bethel, and a
thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin: and the rest of the
people he sent every man to his tent. 13:3 And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in
Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet
throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear. 13:4 And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of the
Philistines, and that Israel also was had in abomination with the
Philistines. And the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal. 13:5 And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
Israel, thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and
people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude: and they
came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Bethaven. 13:6 When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait, (for the
people were distressed,) then the people did hide themselves in caves,
and in thickets, and in rocks, and in high places, and in pits. 13:7 And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and
Gilead. As for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed
him trembling. 13:8 And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel
had appointed: but Samuel came not to Gilgal; and the people were
scattered from him. 13:9 And Saul said, Bring hither a burnt offering to me, and peace
offerings. And he offered the burnt offering. 13:10 And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of
offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came; and Saul went out to
meet him, that he might salute him. 13:11 And Samuel said, What hast thou done? And Saul said, Because I
saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou camest not
within the days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered
themselves together at Michmash; 13:12 Therefore said I, The
Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made
supplication unto the LORD: I forced myself therefore, and offered a
burnt offering. 13:13 And Samuel said to Saul, Thou hast done foolishly: thou hast not
kept the commandment of the LORD thy God, which he commanded thee: for
now would the LORD have established thy kingdom upon Israel for ever. 13:14 But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the LORD hath sought him
a man after his own heart, and the LORD hath commanded him to be
captain over his people, because thou hast not kept that which the
LORD commanded thee. 13:15 And Samuel arose, and gat him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of
Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people that were present with him,
about six hundred men. 13:16 And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present
with them, abode in Gibeah of Benjamin: but the Philistines encamped
in Michmash. 13:17 And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in
three companies: one company turned unto the way that leadeth to
Ophrah, unto the land of Shual: 13:18 And another company turned the
way to Bethhoron: and another company turned to the way of the border
that looketh to the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness. 13:19 Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel:
for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make them swords or spears:
13:20 But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines, to sharpen
every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock. 13:21 Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and
for the forks, and for the axes, and to sharpen the goads. 13:22 So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither
sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people that were with
Saul and Jonathan: but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there
found. 13:23 And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of
Michmash. 14:1 Now it came to pass upon a day, that Jonathan the son of Saul
said unto the young man that bare his armour, Come, and let us go over
to the Philistines' garrison, that is on the other side. But he told
not his father. 14:2 And Saul tarried in the uttermost part of Gibeah under a
pomegranate tree which is in Migron: and the people that were with him
were about six hundred men; 14:3 And Ahiah, the son of Ahitub,
Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the LORD's
priest in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people knew not that
Jonathan was gone. 14:4 And between the passages, by which Jonathan sought to go over
unto the Philistines' garrison, there was a sharp rock on the one
side, and a sharp rock on the other side: and the name of the one was
Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh. 14:5 The forefront of the one was situate northward over against
Michmash, and the other southward over against Gibeah. 14:6 And Jonathan said to the young man that bare his armour, Come,
and let us go over unto the garrison of these uncircumcised: it may be
that the LORD will work for us: for there is no restraint to the LORD
to save by many or by few. 14:7 And his armourbearer said unto him, Do all that is in thine
heart: turn thee; behold, I am with thee according to thy heart. 14:8 Then said Jonathan, Behold, we will pass over unto these men, and
we will discover ourselves unto them. 14:9 If they say thus unto us, Tarry until we come to you; then we
will stand still in our place, and will not go up unto them. 14:10 But if they say thus, Come up unto us; then we will go up: for
the LORD hath delivered them into our hand: and this shall be a sign
unto us. 14:11 And both of them discovered themselves unto the garrison of the
Philistines: and the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth
out of the holes where they had hid themselves. 14:12 And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his
armourbearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will shew you a thing. And Jonathan said unto his armourbearer, Come up after me: for the
LORD hath delivered them into the hand of Israel. 14:13 And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and
his armourbearer after him: and they fell before Jonathan; and his
armourbearer slew after him. 14:14 And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armourbearer
made, was about twenty men, within as it were an half acre of land,
which a yoke of oxen might plow. 14:15 And there was trembling in the host, in the field, and among all
the people: the garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled, and
the earth quaked: so it was a very great trembling. 14:16 And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked; and,
behold, the multitude melted away, and they went on beating down one
another. 14:17 Then said Saul unto the people that were with him, Number now,
and see who is gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold,
Jonathan and his armourbearer were not there. 14:18 And Saul said unto Ahiah, Bring hither the ark of God. For the
ark of God was at that time with the children of Israel. 14:19 And it came to pass, while Saul talked unto the priest, that the
noise that was in the host of the Philistines went on and increased:
and Saul said unto the priest, Withdraw thine hand. 14:20 And Saul and all the people that were with him assembled
themselves, and they came to the battle: and, behold, every man's
sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture. 14:21 Moreover the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that
time, which went up with them into the camp from the country round
about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites that were with
Saul and Jonathan. 14:22 Likewise all the men of Israel which had hid themselves in mount
Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also
followed hard after them in the battle. 14:23 So the LORD saved Israel that day: and the battle passed over
unto Bethaven. 14:24 And the men of Israel were distressed that day: for Saul had
adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth any food
until evening, that I may be avenged on mine enemies. So none of the
people tasted any food. 14:25 And all they of the land came to a wood; and there was honey
upon the ground. 14:26 And when the people were come into the wood, behold, the honey
dropped; but no man put his hand to his mouth: for the people feared
the oath. 14:27 But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with
the oath: wherefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his
hand, and dipped it in an honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth;
and his eyes were enlightened. 14:28 Then answered one of the people, and said, Thy father straitly
charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man that eateth
any food this day. And the people were faint. 14:29 Then said Jonathan, My father hath troubled the land: see, I
pray you, how mine eyes have been enlightened, because I tasted a
little of this honey. 14:30 How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely to day of
the spoil of their enemies which they found? for had there not been
now a much greater slaughter among the Philistines? 14:31 And they
smote the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon: and the
people were very faint. 14:32 And the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen,
and calves, and slew them on the ground: and the people did eat them
with the blood. 14:33 Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against the
LORD, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, Ye have
transgressed: roll a great stone unto me this day. 14:34 And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say
unto them, Bring me hither every man his ox, and every man his sheep,
and slay them here, and eat; and sin not against the LORD in eating
with the blood. And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and
slew them there. 14:35 And Saul built an altar unto the LORD: the same was the first
altar that he built unto the LORD. 14:36 And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night,
and spoil them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of
them. And they said, Do whatsoever seemeth good unto thee. Then said
the priest, Let us draw near hither unto God. 14:37 And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the
Philistines? wilt thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he
answered him not that day. 14:38 And Saul said, Draw ye near hither, all the chief of the people:
and know and see wherein this sin hath been this day. 14:39 For, as the LORD liveth, which saveth Israel, though it be in
Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among
all the people that answered him. 14:40 Then said he unto all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and
Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said unto
Saul, Do what seemeth good unto thee. 14:41 Therefore Saul said unto the LORD God of Israel, Give a perfect
lot. And Saul and Jonathan were taken: but the people escaped. 14:42 And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And
Jonathan was taken. 14:43 Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And
Jonathan told him, and said, I did but taste a little honey with the
end of the rod that was in mine hand, and, lo, I must die. 14:44 And Saul answered, God do so and more also: for thou shalt
surely die, Jonathan. 14:45 And the people said unto Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who hath
wrought this great salvation in Israel? God forbid: as the LORD
liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground; for
he hath wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan,
that he died not. 14:46 Then Saul went up from following the Philistines: and the
Philistines went to their own place. 14:47 So Saul took the kingdom over Israel, and fought against all his
enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the children of
Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against
the Philistines: and whithersoever he turned himself, he vexed them. 14:48 And he gathered an host, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered
Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them. 14:49 Now the sons of Saul were Jonathan, and Ishui, and Melchishua:
and the names of his two daughters were these; the name of the
firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal: 14:50 And the
name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam, the daughter of Ahimaaz: and the name
of the captain of his host was Abner, the son of Ner, Saul's uncle. 14:51 And Kish was the father of Saul; and Ner the father of Abner was
the son of Abiel. 14:52 And there was sore war against the Philistines all the days of
Saul: and when Saul saw any strong man, or any valiant man, he took
him unto him. 15:1 Samuel also said unto Saul, The LORD sent me to anoint thee to be
king over his people, over Israel: now therefore hearken thou unto the
voice of the words of the LORD. 15:2 Thus saith the LORD of hosts, I remember that which Amalek did to
Israel, how he laid wait for him in the way, when he came up from
Egypt. 15:3 Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have,
and spare them not; but slay both man and woman, infant and suckling,
ox and sheep, camel and ass. 15:4 And Saul gathered the people together, and numbered them in
Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah. 15:5 And Saul came to a city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley. 15:6 And Saul said unto the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from
among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them: for ye shewed
kindness to all the children of Israel, when they came up out of
Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites. 15:7 And Saul smote the Amalekites from Havilah until thou comest to
Shur, that is over against Egypt. 15:8 And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly
destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword. 15:9 But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep,
and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was
good, and would not utterly destroy them: but every thing that was
vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly. 15:10 Then came the word of the LORD unto Samuel, saying, 15:11 It
repenteth me that I have set up Saul to be king: for he is turned back
from following me, and hath not performed my commandments. And it
grieved Samuel; and he cried unto the LORD all night. 15:12 And when Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, it was
told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set him up a
place, and is gone about, and passed on, and gone down to Gilgal. 15:13 And Samuel came to Saul: and Saul said unto him, Blessed be thou
of the LORD: I have performed the commandment of the LORD. 15:14 And Samuel said, What meaneth then this bleating of the sheep in
mine ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? 15:15 And Saul
said, They have brought them from the Amalekites: for the people
spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen, to sacrifice unto the
LORD thy God; and the rest we have utterly destroyed. 15:16 Then Samuel said unto Saul, Stay, and I will tell thee what the
LORD hath said to me this night. And he said unto him, Say on. 15:17 And Samuel said, When thou wast little in thine own sight, wast
thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel, and the LORD anointed
thee king over Israel? 15:18 And the LORD sent thee on a journey, and
said, Go and utterly destroy the sinners the Amalekites, and fight
against them until they be consumed. 15:19 Wherefore then didst thou not obey the voice of the LORD, but
didst fly upon the spoil, and didst evil in the sight of the LORD? 15:20 And Saul said unto Samuel, Yea, I have obeyed the voice of the
LORD, and have gone the way which the LORD sent me, and have brought
Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites. 15:21 But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of
the things which should have been utterly destroyed, to sacrifice unto
the LORD thy God in Gilgal. 15:22 And Samuel said, Hath the LORD as great delight in burnt
offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the LORD? Behold,
to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams. 15:23 For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is
as iniquity and idolatry. Because thou hast rejected the word of the
LORD, he hath also rejected thee from being king. 15:24 And Saul said unto Samuel, I have sinned: for I have
transgressed the commandment of the LORD, and thy words: because I
feared the people, and obeyed their voice. 15:25 Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the LORD. 15:26 And Samuel said unto Saul, I will not return with thee: for thou
hast rejected the word of the LORD, and the LORD hath rejected thee
from being king over Israel. 15:27 And as Samuel turned about to go away, he laid hold upon the
skirt of his mantle, and it rent. 15:28 And Samuel said unto him, The LORD hath rent the kingdom of
Israel from thee this day, and hath given it to a neighbour of thine,
that is better than thou. 15:29 And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent: for he
is not a man, that he should repent. 15:30 Then he said, I have sinned: yet honour me now, I pray thee,
before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with
me, that I may worship the LORD thy God. 15:31 So Samuel turned again after Saul; and Saul worshipped the LORD. 15:32 Then said Samuel, Bring ye hither to me Agag the king of the
Amalekites. And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said, Surely
the bitterness of death is past. 15:33 And Samuel said, As the sword hath made women childless, so
shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in
pieces before the LORD in Gilgal. 15:34 Then Samuel went to Ramah; and Saul went up to his house to
Gibeah of Saul. 15:35 And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death:
nevertheless Samuel mourned for Saul: and the LORD repented that he
had made Saul king over Israel. 16:1 And the LORD said unto Samuel, How long wilt thou mourn for Saul,
seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? fill thine horn
with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite: for I
have provided me a king among his sons. 16:2 And Samuel said, How can I go? if Saul hear it, he will kill me. And the LORD said, Take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to
sacrifice to the LORD. 16:3 And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee. 16:4 And Samuel did that which the LORD spake, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest
thou peaceably? 16:5 And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice
unto the LORD: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice. 16:6 And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on
Eliab, and said, Surely the LORD's anointed is before him. 16:7 But the LORD said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on
the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the LORD
seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but
the LORD looketh on the heart. 16:8 Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And
he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this. 16:9 Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the
LORD chosen this. 16:10 Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And
Samuel said unto Jesse, The LORD hath not chosen these. 16:11 And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children? And he
said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the
sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither. 16:12 And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the LORD said,
Arise, anoint him: for this is he. 16:13 Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the Spirit of the LORD came upon David from that
day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah. 16:14 But the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil
spirit from the LORD troubled him. 16:15 And Saul's servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit
from God troubleth thee. 16:16 Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well. 16:17 And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can
play well, and bring him to me. 16:18 Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen
a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a
mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a
comely person, and the LORD is with him. 16:19 Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me
David thy son, which is with the sheep. 16:20 And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul. 16:21 And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
greatly; and he became his armourbearer. 16:22 And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand
before me; for he hath found favour in my sight. 16:23 And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon
Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was
refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him. 17:1 Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and
were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and
pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim. 17:2 And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and
pitched by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the
Philistines. 17:3 And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and
Israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley
between them. 17:4 And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines,
named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span. 17:5 And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed
with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand
shekels of brass. 17:6 And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass
between his shoulders. 17:7 And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his
spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a
shield went before him. 17:8 And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto
them, Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a
Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let
him come down to me. 17:9 If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be
your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall
ye be our servants, and serve us. 17:10 And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day;
give me a man, that we may fight together. 17:11 When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine,
they were dismayed, and greatly afraid. 17:12 Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah,
whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among
men for an old man in the days of Saul. 17:13 And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the
battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were
Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third
Shammah. 17:14 And David was the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul. 17:15 But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father's sheep
at Bethlehem. 17:16 And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented
himself forty days. 17:17 And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an
ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
of thy brethren; 17:18 And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of
their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge. 17:19 Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the
valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines. 17:20 And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with
a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came
to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted
for the battle. 17:21 For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army
against army. 17:22 And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the
carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren. 17:23 And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion,
the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the
Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard
them. 17:24 And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him,
and were sore afraid. 17:25 And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come
up? surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the
man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and
will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in
Israel. 17:26 And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall
be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the
reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that
he should defy the armies of the living God? 17:27 And the people
answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man
that killeth him. 17:28 And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men;
and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest
thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle. 17:29 And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause? 17:30 And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same
manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner. 17:31 And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed
them before Saul: and he sent for him. 17:32 And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him;
thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine. 17:33 And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this
Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man
of war from his youth. 17:34 And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:35 And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of
his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him. 17:36 Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath
defied the armies of the living God. 17:37 David said moreover, The LORD that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of
the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the
LORD be with thee. 17:38 And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail. 17:39 And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to
go; for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go
with these; for I have not proved them. And David put them off him. 17:40 And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth
stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he
had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near
to the Philistine. 17:41 And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man
that bare the shield went before him. 17:42 And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he
disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance. 17:43 And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest
to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. 17:44 And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field. 17:45 Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the
name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou
hast defied. 17:46 This day will the LORD deliver thee into mine hand; and I will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the
carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the
air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a God in Israel. 17:47 And all this assembly shall know that the LORD saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battle is the LORD's, and he will give you
into our hands. 17:48 And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came, and
drew nigh to meet David, that David hastened, and ran toward the army
to meet the Philistine. 17:49 And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone
sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth. 17:50 So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a
stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword
in the hand of David. 17:51 Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his
sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut
off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion
was dead, they fled. 17:52 And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and
pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the
gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim,
even unto Gath, and unto Ekron. 17:53 And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the
Philistines, and they spoiled their tents. 17:54 And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to
Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent. 17:55 And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said
unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell. 17:56 And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is. 17:57 And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine,
Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the
Philistine in his hand. 17:58 And Saul said to him, Whose son art thou, thou young man? And
David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite. 18:1 And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking unto
Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and
Jonathan loved him as his own soul. 18:2 And Saul took him that day, and would let him go no more home to
his father's house. 18:3 Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as
his own soul. 18:4 And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and
gave it to David, and his garments, even to his sword, and to his bow,
and to his girdle. 18:5 And David went out whithersoever Saul sent him, and behaved
himself wisely: and Saul set him over the men of war, and he was
accepted in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of
Saul's servants. 18:6 And it came to pass as they came, when David was returned from
the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all cities
of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with tabrets, with
joy, and with instruments of musick. 18:7 And the women answered one another as they played, and said, Saul
hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. 18:8 And Saul was very wroth, and the saying displeased him; and he
said, They have ascribed unto David ten thousands, and to me they have
ascribed but thousands: and what can he have more but the kingdom? 18:9 And Saul eyed David from that day and forward. 18:10 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the evil spirit from God
came upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house: and David
played with his hand, as at other times: and there was a javelin in
Saul's hand. 18:11 And Saul cast the javelin; for he said, I will smite David even
to the wall with it. And David avoided out of his presence twice. 18:12 And Saul was afraid of David, because the LORD was with him, and
was departed from Saul. 18:13 Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain
over a thousand; and he went out and came in before the people. 18:14 And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways; and the LORD
was with him. 18:15 Wherefore when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he
was afraid of him. 18:16 But all Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and
came in before them. 18:17 And Saul said to David, Behold my elder daughter Merab, her will
I give thee to wife: only be thou valiant for me, and fight the LORD's
battles. For Saul said, Let not mine hand be upon him, but let the hand of the
Philistines be upon him. 18:18 And David said unto Saul, Who am I? and what is my life, or my
father's family in Israel, that I should be son in law to the king? 18:19 But it came to pass at the time when Merab Saul's daughter
should have been given to David, that she was given unto Adriel the
Meholathite to wife. 18:20 And Michal Saul's daughter loved David: and they told Saul, and
the thing pleased him. 18:21 And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to
him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Wherefore Saul said to David, Thou shalt this day be my son in law in
the one of the twain. 18:22 And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Commune with David
secretly, and say, Behold, the king hath delight in thee, and all his
servants love thee: now therefore be the king's son in law. 18:23 And Saul's servants spake those words in the ears of David. And
David said, Seemeth it to you a light thing to be a king's son in law,
seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed? 18:24 And the
servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner spake David. 18:25 And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king desireth not
any dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged
of the king's enemies. But Saul thought to make David fall by the hand
of the Philistines. 18:26 And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David
well to be the king's son in law: and the days were not expired. 18:27 Wherefore David arose and went, he and his men, and slew of the
Philistines two hundred men; and David brought their foreskins, and
they gave them in full tale to the king, that he might be the king's
son in law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife. 18:28 And Saul saw and knew that the LORD was with David, and that
Michal Saul's daughter loved him. 18:29 And Saul was yet the more afraid of David; and Saul became
David's enemy continually. 18:30 Then the princes of the Philistines went forth: and it came to
pass, after they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely
than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by. 19:1 And Saul spake to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that
they should kill David. 19:2 But Jonathan Saul's son delighted much in David: and Jonathan
told David, saying, Saul my father seeketh to kill thee: now
therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself until the morning, and
abide in a secret place, and hide thyself: 19:3 And I will go out and
stand beside my father in the field where thou art, and I will commune
with my father of thee; and what I see, that I will tell thee. 19:4 And Jonathan spake good of David unto Saul his father, and said
unto him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David;
because he hath not sinned against thee, and because his works have
been to thee-ward very good: 19:5 For he did put his life in his hand,
and slew the Philistine, and the LORD wrought a great salvation for
all Israel: thou sawest it, and didst rejoice: wherefore then wilt
thou sin against innocent blood, to slay David without a cause? 19:6
And Saul hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan: and Saul sware, As the
LORD liveth, he shall not be slain. 19:7 And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan shewed him all those
things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence, as in
times past. 19:8 And there was war again: and David went out, and fought with the
Philistines, and slew them with a great slaughter; and they fled from
him. 19:9 And the evil spirit from the LORD was upon Saul, as he sat in his
house with his javelin in his hand: and David played with his hand. 19:10 And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the
javelin: but he slipped away out of Saul's presence, and he smote the
javelin into the wall: and David fled, and escaped that night. 19:11 Saul also sent messengers unto David's house, to watch him, and
to slay him in the morning: and Michal David's wife told him, saying,
If thou save not thy life to night, to morrow thou shalt be slain. 19:12 So Michal let David down through a window: and he went, and
fled, and escaped. 19:13 And Michal took an image, and laid it in the bed, and put a
pillow of goats' hair for his bolster, and covered it with a cloth. 19:14 And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is
sick. 19:15 And Saul sent the messengers again to see David, saying, Bring
him up to me in the bed, that I may slay him. 19:16 And when the messengers were come in, behold, there was an image
in the bed, with a pillow of goats' hair for his bolster. 19:17 And Saul said unto Michal, Why hast thou deceived me so, and
sent away mine enemy, that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He
said unto me, Let me go; why should I kill thee? 19:18 So David fled,
and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul
had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth. 19:19 And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in
Ramah. 19:20 And Saul sent messengers to take David: and when they saw the
company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed
over them, the Spirit of God was upon the messengers of Saul, and they
also prophesied. 19:21 And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they
prophesied likewise. And Saul sent messengers again the third time,
and they prophesied also. 19:22 Then went he also to Ramah, and came to a great well that is in
Sechu: and he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one
said, Behold, they be at Naioth in Ramah. 19:23 And he went thither to Naioth in Ramah: and the Spirit of God
was upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied, until he came to
Naioth in Ramah. 19:24 And he stripped off his clothes also, and prophesied before
Samuel in like manner, and lay down naked all that day and all that
night. Wherefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets? 20:1 And
David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan,
What have I done? what is mine iniquity? and what is my sin before thy
father, that he seeketh my life? 20:2 And he said unto him, God
forbid; thou shalt not die: behold, my father will do nothing either
great or small, but that he will shew it me: and why should my father
hide this thing from me? it is not so. 20:3 And David sware moreover, and said, Thy father certainly knoweth
that I have found grace in thine eyes; and he saith, Let not Jonathan
know this, lest he be grieved: but truly as the LORD liveth, and as
thy soul liveth, there is but a step between me and death. 20:4 Then said Jonathan unto David, Whatsoever thy soul desireth, I
will even do it for thee. 20:5 And David said unto Jonathan, Behold, to morrow is the new moon,
and I should not fail to sit with the king at meat: but let me go,
that I may hide myself in the field unto the third day at even. 20:6 If thy father at all miss me, then say, David earnestly asked
leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city: for there is a
yearly sacrifice there for all the family. 20:7 If he say thus, It is well; thy servant shall have peace: but if
he be very wroth, then be sure that evil is determined by him. 20:8 Therefore thou shalt deal kindly with thy servant; for thou hast
brought thy servant into a covenant of the LORD with thee:
notwithstanding, if there be in me iniquity, slay me thyself; for why
shouldest thou bring me to thy father? 20:9 And Jonathan said, Far be
it from thee: for if I knew certainly that evil were determined by my
father to come upon thee, then would not I tell it thee? 20:10 Then
said David to Jonathan, Who shall tell me? or what if thy father
answer thee roughly? 20:11 And Jonathan said unto David, Come, and
let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the
field. 20:12 And Jonathan said unto David, O LORD God of Israel, when I have
sounded my father about to morrow any time, or the third day, and,
behold, if there be good toward David, and I then send not unto thee,
and shew it thee; 20:13 The LORD do so and much more to Jonathan: but
if it please my father to do thee evil, then I will shew it thee, and
send thee away, that thou mayest go in peace: and the LORD be with
thee, as he hath been with my father. 20:14 And thou shalt not only while yet I live shew me the kindness of
the LORD, that I die not: 20:15 But also thou shalt not cut off thy
kindness from my house for ever: no, not when the LORD hath cut off
the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth. 20:16 So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, Let
the LORD even require it at the hand of David's enemies. 20:17 And Jonathan caused David to swear again, because he loved him:
for he loved him as he loved his own soul. 20:18 Then Jonathan said to David, To morrow is the new moon: and thou
shalt be missed, because thy seat will be empty. 20:19 And when thou hast stayed three days, then thou shalt go down
quickly, and come to the place where thou didst hide thyself when the
business was in hand, and shalt remain by the stone Ezel. 20:20 And I will shoot three arrows on the side thereof, as though I
shot at a mark. 20:21 And, behold, I will send a lad, saying, Go, find out the arrows. If I expressly say unto the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side
of thee, take them; then come thou: for there is peace to thee, and no
hurt; as the LORD liveth. 20:22 But if I say thus unto the young man, Behold, the arrows are
beyond thee; go thy way: for the LORD hath sent thee away. 20:23 And as touching the matter which thou and I have spoken of,
behold, the LORD be between thee and me for ever. 20:24 So David hid himself in the field: and when the new moon was
come, the king sat him down to eat meat. 20:25 And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon a
seat by the wall: and Jonathan arose, and Abner sat by Saul's side,
and David's place was empty. 20:26 Nevertheless Saul spake not any thing that day: for he thought,
Something hath befallen him, he is not clean; surely he is not clean. 20:27 And it came to pass on the morrow, which was the second day of
the month, that David's place was empty: and Saul said unto Jonathan
his son, Wherefore cometh not the son of Jesse to meat, neither
yesterday, nor to day? 20:28 And Jonathan answered Saul, David
earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem: 20:29 And he said, Let
me go, I pray thee; for our family hath a sacrifice in the city; and
my brother, he hath commanded me to be there: and now, if I have found
favour in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my
brethren. Therefore he cometh not unto the king's table. 20:30 Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said unto
him, Thou son of the perverse rebellious woman, do not I know that
thou hast chosen the son of Jesse to thine own confusion, and unto the
confusion of thy mother's nakedness? 20:31 For as long as the son of
Jesse liveth upon the ground, thou shalt not be established, nor thy
kingdom. Wherefore now send and fetch him unto me, for he shall surely
die. 20:32 And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said unto him,
Wherefore shall he be slain? what hath he done? 20:33 And Saul cast a
javelin at him to smite him: whereby Jonathan knew that it was
determined of his father to slay David. 20:34 So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and did eat no
meat the second day of the month: for he was grieved for David,
because his father had done him shame. 20:35 And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into
the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him. 20:36 And he said unto his lad, Run, find out now the arrows which I
shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him. 20:37 And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which
Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the
arrow beyond thee? 20:38 And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make
speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and
came to his master. 20:39 But the lad knew not any thing: only Jonathan and David knew the
matter. 20:40 And Jonathan gave his artillery unto his lad, and said unto him,
Go, carry them to the city. 20:41 And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place
toward the south, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed
himself three times: and they kissed one another, and wept one with
another, until David exceeded. 20:42 And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, forasmuch as we have
sworn both of us in the name of the LORD, saying, The LORD be between
me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed for ever. And he arose
and departed: and Jonathan went into the city. 21:1 Then came David to Nob to Ahimelech the priest: and Ahimelech was
afraid at the meeting of David, and said unto him, Why art thou alone,
and no man with thee? 21:2 And David said unto Ahimelech the priest,
The king hath commanded me a business, and hath said unto me, Let no
man know any thing of the business whereabout I send thee, and what I
have commanded thee: and I have appointed my servants to such and such
a place. 21:3 Now therefore what is under thine hand? give me five loaves of
bread in mine hand, or what there is present. 21:4 And the priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread
under mine hand, but there is hallowed bread; if the young men have
kept themselves at least from women. 21:5 And David answered the priest, and said unto him, Of a truth
women have been kept from us about these three days, since I came out,
and the vessels of the young men are holy, and the bread is in a
manner common, yea, though it were sanctified this day in the vessel. 21:6 So the priest gave him hallowed bread: for there was no bread
there but the shewbread, that was taken from before the LORD, to put
hot bread in the day when it was taken away.