31:5 And the LORD shall give them up before your face, that ye may do
unto them according unto all the commandments which I have commanded
you. 31:6 Be strong and of a good courage, fear not, nor be afraid of them:
for the LORD thy God, he it is that doth go with thee; he will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee. 31:7 And Moses called unto Joshua, and said unto him in the sight of
all Israel, Be strong and of a good courage: for thou must go with
this people unto the land which the LORD hath sworn unto their fathers
to give them; and thou shalt cause them to inherit it. 31:8 And the LORD, he it is that doth go before thee; he will be with
thee, he will not fail thee, neither forsake thee: fear not, neither
be dismayed. 31:9 And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it unto the priests the
sons of Levi, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, and unto
all the elders of Israel. 31:10 And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven
years, in the solemnity of the year of release, in the feast of
tabernacles, 31:11 When all Israel is come to appear before the LORD
thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shalt read this law
before all Israel in their hearing. 31:12 Gather the people together, men and women, and children, and thy
stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they
may learn, and fear the LORD your God, and observe to do all the words
of this law: 31:13 And that their children, which have not known any
thing, may hear, and learn to fear the LORD your God, as long as ye
live in the land whither ye go over Jordan to possess it. 31:14 And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thy days approach that
thou must die: call Joshua, and present yourselves in the tabernacle
of the congregation, that I may give him a charge. And Moses and
Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tabernacle of the
congregation. 31:15 And the LORD appeared in the tabernacle in a pillar of a cloud:
and the pillar of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle. 31:16 And the LORD said unto Moses, Behold, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers; and this people will rise up, and go a whoring after the gods
of the strangers of the land, whither they go to be among them, and
will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them. 31:17 Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I
will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall
be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall befall them; so that
they will say in that day, Are not these evils come upon us, because
our God is not among us? 31:18 And I will surely hide my face in that
day for all the evils which they shall have wrought, in that they are
turned unto other gods. 31:19 Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach it the
children of Israel: put it in their mouths, that this song may be a
witness for me against the children of Israel. 31:20 For when I shall have brought them into the land which I sware
unto their fathers, that floweth with milk and honey; and they shall
have eaten and filled themselves, and waxen fat; then will they turn
unto other gods, and serve them, and provoke me, and break my
covenant. 31:21 And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles are
befallen them, that this song shall testify against them as a witness;
for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for I
know their imagination which they go about, even now, before I have
brought them into the land which I sware. 31:22 Moses therefore wrote this song the same day, and taught it the
children of Israel. 31:23 And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge, and said, Be strong
and of a good courage: for thou shalt bring the children of Israel
into the land which I sware unto them: and I will be with thee. 31:24 And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the
words of this law in a book, until they were finished, 31:25 That
Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the
LORD, saying, 31:26 Take this book of the law, and put it in the side
of the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, that it may be there
for a witness against thee. 31:27 For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck: behold, while I am
yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against the LORD;
and how much more after my death? 31:28 Gather unto me all the elders
of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in
their ears, and call heaven and earth to record against them. 31:29 For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt
yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you;
and evil will befall you in the latter days; because ye will do evil
in the sight of the LORD, to provoke him to anger through the work of
your hands. 31:30 And Moses spake in the ears of all the congregation of Israel
the words of this song, until they were ended. 32:1 Give ear, O ye heavens, and I will speak; and hear, O earth, the
words of my mouth. 32:2 My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon
the grass: 32:3 Because I will publish the name of the LORD: ascribe
ye greatness unto our God. 32:4 He is the Rock, his work is perfect: for all his ways are
judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he. 32:5 They have corrupted themselves, their spot is not the spot of his
children: they are a perverse and crooked generation. 32:6 Do ye thus requite the LORD, O foolish people and unwise? is not
he thy father that hath bought thee? hath he not made thee, and
established thee? 32:7 Remember the days of old, consider the years
of many generations: ask thy father, and he will shew thee; thy
elders, and they will tell thee. 32:8 When the Most High divided to the nations their inheritance, when
he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people
according to the number of the children of Israel. 32:9 For the LORD's portion is his people; Jacob is the lot of his
inheritance. 32:10 He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling
wilderness; he led him about, he instructed him, he kept him as the
apple of his eye. 32:11 As an eagle stirreth up her nest, fluttereth over her young,
spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her wings:
32:12 So the LORD alone did lead him, and there was no strange god
with him. 32:13 He made him ride on the high places of the earth, that he might
eat the increase of the fields; and he made him to suck honey out of
the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock; 32:14 Butter of kine, and
milk of sheep, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and
goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat; and thou didst drink the pure
blood of the grape. 32:15 But Jeshurun waxed fat, and kicked: thou art waxen fat, thou art
grown thick, thou art covered with fatness; then he forsook God which
made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation. 32:16 They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with
abominations provoked they him to anger. 32:17 They sacrificed unto devils, not to God; to gods whom they knew
not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers feared not. 32:18 Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast
forgotten God that formed thee. 32:19 And when the LORD saw it, he abhorred them, because of the
provoking of his sons, and of his daughters. 32:20 And he said, I will hide my face from them, I will see what
their end shall be: for they are a very froward generation, children
in whom is no faith. 32:21 They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they
have provoked me to anger with their vanities: and I will move them to
jealousy with those which are not a people; I will provoke them to
anger with a foolish nation. 32:22 For a fire is kindled in mine anger, and shall burn unto the
lowest hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on
fire the foundations of the mountains. 32:23 I will heap mischiefs upon them; I will spend mine arrows upon
them. 32:24 They shall be burnt with hunger, and devoured with burning heat,
and with bitter destruction: I will also send the teeth of beasts upon
them, with the poison of serpents of the dust. 32:25 The sword without, and terror within, shall destroy both the
young man and the virgin, the suckling also with the man of gray
hairs. 32:26 I said, I would scatter them into corners, I would make the
remembrance of them to cease from among men: 32:27 Were it not that I
feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and lest they should say, Our hand is high, and
the LORD hath not done all this. 32:28 For they are a nation void of counsel, neither is there any
understanding in them. 32:29 O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end! 32:30 How should one chase a
thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight, except their Rock had
sold them, and the LORD had shut them up? 32:31 For their rock is not
as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges. 32:32 For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of
Gomorrah: their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter:
32:33 Their wine is the poison of dragons, and the cruel venom of
asps. 32:34 Is not this laid up in store with me, and sealed up among my
treasures? 32:35 To me belongeth vengeance and recompence; their foot
shall slide in due time: for the day of their calamity is at hand, and
the things that shall come upon them make haste. 32:36 For the LORD shall judge his people, and repent himself for his
servants, when he seeth that their power is gone, and there is none
shut up, or left. 32:37 And he shall say, Where are their gods, their rock in whom they
trusted, 32:38 Which did eat the fat of their sacrifices, and drank
the wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up and help you, and
be your protection. 32:39 See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me: I
kill, and I make alive; I wound, and I heal: neither is there any that
can deliver out of my hand. 32:40 For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, I live for ever. 32:41 If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on
judgment; I will render vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward
them that hate me. 32:42 I will make mine arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall
devour flesh; and that with the blood of the slain and of the
captives, from the beginning of revenges upon the enemy. 32:43 Rejoice, O ye nations, with his people: for he will avenge the
blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries,
and will be merciful unto his land, and to his people. 32:44 And Moses came and spake all the words of this song in the ears
of the people, he, and Hoshea the son of Nun. 32:45 And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel:
32:46 And he said unto them, Set your hearts unto all the words which
I testify among you this day, which ye shall command your children to
observe to do, all the words of this law. 32:47 For it is not a vain thing for you; because it is your life: and
through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land, whither ye
go over Jordan to possess it. 32:48 And the LORD spake unto Moses that selfsame day, saying, 32:49
Get thee up into this mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, which is in
the land of Moab, that is over against Jericho; and behold the land of
Canaan, which I give unto the children of Israel for a possession:
32:50 And die in the mount whither thou goest up, and be gathered unto
thy people; as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered
unto his people: 32:51 Because ye trespassed against me among the
children of Israel at the waters of MeribahKadesh, in the wilderness
of Zin; because ye sanctified me not in the midst of the children of
Israel. 32:52 Yet thou shalt see the land before thee; but thou shalt not go
thither unto the land which I give the children of Israel. 33:1 And this is the blessing, wherewith Moses the man of God blessed
the children of Israel before his death. 33:2 And he said, The LORD came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto
them; he shined forth from mount Paran, and he came with ten thousands
of saints: from his right hand went a fiery law for them. 33:3 Yea, he loved the people; all his saints are in thy hand: and
they sat down at thy feet; every one shall receive of thy words. 33:4 Moses commanded us a law, even the inheritance of the
congregation of Jacob. 33:5 And he was king in Jeshurun, when the heads of the people and the
tribes of Israel were gathered together. 33:6 Let Reuben live, and not die; and let not his men be few. 33:7 And this is the blessing of Judah: and he said, Hear, LORD, the
voice of Judah, and bring him unto his people: let his hands be
sufficient for him; and be thou an help to him from his enemies. 33:8 And of Levi he said, Let thy Thummim and thy Urim be with thy
holy one, whom thou didst prove at Massah, and with whom thou didst
strive at the waters of Meribah; 33:9 Who said unto his father and to
his mother, I have not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his
brethren, nor knew his own children: for they have observed thy word,
and kept thy covenant. 33:10 They shall teach Jacob thy judgments, and Israel thy law: they
shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt sacrifice upon thine
altar. 33:11 Bless, LORD, his substance, and accept the work of his hands;
smite through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them
that hate him, that they rise not again. 33:12 And of Benjamin he said, The beloved of the LORD shall dwell in
safety by him; and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he
shall dwell between his shoulders. 33:13 And of Joseph he said, Blessed of the LORD be his land, for the
precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that coucheth
beneath, 33:14 And for the precious fruits brought forth by the sun,
and for the precious things put forth by the moon, 33:15 And for the
chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of
the lasting hills, 33:16 And for the precious things of the earth and
fulness thereof, and for the good will of him that dwelt in the bush:
let the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of the
head of him that was separated from his brethren. 33:17 His glory is like the firstling of his bullock, and his horns
are like the horns of unicorns: with them he shall push the people
together to the ends of the earth: and they are the ten thousands of
Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh. 33:18 And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out; and,
Issachar, in thy tents. 33:19 They shall call the people unto the mountain; there they shall
offer sacrifices of righteousness: for they shall suck of the
abundance of the seas, and of treasures hid in the sand. 33:20 And of Gad he said, Blessed be he that enlargeth Gad: he
dwelleth as a lion, and teareth the arm with the crown of the head. 33:21 And he provided the first part for himself, because there, in a
portion of the lawgiver, was he seated; and he came with the heads of
the people, he executed the justice of the LORD, and his judgments
with Israel. 33:22 And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's whelp: he shall leap from
Bashan. 33:23 And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favour, and
full with the blessing of the LORD: possess thou the west and the
south. 33:24 And of Asher he said, Let Asher be blessed with children; let
him be acceptable to his brethren, and let him dip his foot in oil. 33:25 Thy shoes shall be iron and brass; and as thy days, so shall thy
strength be. 33:26 There is none like unto the God of Jeshurun, who rideth upon the
heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the sky. 33:27 The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the
everlasting arms: and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee;
and shall say, Destroy them. 33:28 Israel then shall dwell in safety alone: the fountain of Jacob
shall be upon a land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop
down dew. 33:29 Happy art thou, O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved
by the LORD, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency! and thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee; and thou
shalt tread upon their high places. 34:1 And Moses went up from the plains of Moab unto the mountain of
Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is over against Jericho. And the LORD
shewed him all the land of Gilead, unto Dan, 34:2 And all Naphtali,
and the land of Ephraim, and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, unto
the utmost sea, 34:3 And the south, and the plain of the valley of
Jericho, the city of palm trees, unto Zoar. 34:4 And the LORD said unto him, This is the land which I sware unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying, I will give it unto thy
seed: I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not
go over thither. 34:5 So Moses the servant of the LORD died there in the land of Moab,
according to the word of the LORD. 34:6 And he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab, over against
Bethpeor: but no man knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day. 34:7 And Moses was an hundred and twenty years old when he died: his
eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated. 34:8 And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab
thirty days: so the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended. 34:9 And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom; for
Moses had laid his hands upon him: and the children of Israel
hearkened unto him, and did as the LORD commanded Moses. 34:10 And there arose not a prophet since in Israel like unto Moses,
whom the LORD knew face to face, 34:11 In all the signs and the
wonders, which the LORD sent him to do in the land of Egypt to
Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land, 34:12 And in
all that mighty hand, and in all the great terror which Moses shewed
in the sight of all Israel. The Book of Joshua


1:1 Now after the death of Moses the servant of the LORD it came to
pass, that the LORD spake unto Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister,
saying, 1:2 Moses my servant is dead; now therefore arise, go over
this Jordan, thou, and all this people, unto the land which I do give
to them, even to the children of Israel. 1:3 Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, that have
I given unto you, as I said unto Moses. 1:4 From the wilderness and this Lebanon even unto the great river,
the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and unto the great
sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast. 1:5 There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days
of thy life: as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee: I will not
fail thee, nor forsake thee. 1:6 Be strong and of a good courage: for unto this people shalt thou
divide for an inheritance the land, which I sware unto their fathers
to give them. 1:7 Only be thou strong and very courageous, that thou mayest observe
to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee:
turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou mayest
prosper withersoever thou goest. 1:8 This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth; but thou
shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to do
according to all that is written therein: for then thou shalt make thy
way prosperous, and then thou shalt have good success. 1:9 Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good courage; be not
afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the LORD thy God is with thee
whithersoever thou goest. 1:10 Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying, 1:11
Pass through the host, and command the people, saying, Prepare you
victuals; for within three days ye shall pass over this Jordan, to go
in to possess the land, which the LORD your God giveth you to possess
it. 1:12 And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to half the tribe
of Manasseh, spake Joshua, saying, 1:13 Remember the word which Moses
the servant of the LORD commanded you, saying, The LORD your God hath
given you rest, and hath given you this land. 1:14 Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall remain in
the land which Moses gave you on this side Jordan; but ye shall pass
before your brethren armed, all the mighty men of valour, and help
them; 1:15 Until the LORD have given your brethren rest, as he hath
given you, and they also have possessed the land which the LORD your
God giveth them: then ye shall return unto the land of your
possession, and enjoy it, which Moses the LORD's servant gave you on
this side Jordan toward the sunrising. 1:16 And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou commandest us we
will do, and whithersoever thou sendest us, we will go. 1:17 According as we hearkened unto Moses in all things, so will we
hearken unto thee: only the LORD thy God be with thee, as he was with
Moses. 1:18 Whosoever he be that doth rebel against thy commandment, and will
not hearken unto thy words in all that thou commandest him, he shall
be put to death: only be strong and of a good courage. 2:1 And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men to spy
secretly, saying, Go view the land, even Jericho. And they went, and
came into an harlot's house, named Rahab, and lodged there. 2:2 And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, there came
men in hither to night of the children of Israel to search out the
country. 2:3 And the king of Jericho sent unto Rahab, saying, Bring forth the
men that are come to thee, which are entered into thine house: for
they be come to search out all the country. 2:4 And the woman took the two men, and hid them, and said thus, There
came men unto me, but I wist not whence they were: 2:5 And it came to
pass about the time of shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that
the men went out: whither the men went I wot not: pursue after them
quickly; for ye shall overtake them. 2:6 But she had brought them up to the roof of the house, and hid them
with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof. 2:7 And the men pursued after them the way to Jordan unto the fords:
and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut
the gate. 2:8 And before they were laid down, she came up unto them upon the
roof; 2:9 And she said unto the men, I know that the LORD hath given
you the land, and that your terror is fallen upon us, and that all the
inhabitants of the land faint because of you. 2:10 For we have heard how the LORD dried up the water of the Red sea
for you, when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did unto the two kings
of the Amorites, that were on the other side Jordan, Sihon and Og,
whom ye utterly destroyed. 2:11 And as soon as we had heard these things, our hearts did melt,
neither did there remain any more courage in any man, because of you:
for the LORD your God, he is God in heaven above, and in earth
beneath. 2:12 Now therefore, I pray you, swear unto me by the LORD, since I
have shewed you kindness, that ye will also shew kindness unto my
father's house, and give me a true token: 2:13 And that ye will save
alive my father, and my mother, and my brethren, and my sisters, and
all that they have, and deliver our lives from death. 2:14 And the men answered her, Our life for yours, if ye utter not
this our business. And it shall be, when the LORD hath given us the
land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee. 2:15 Then she let them down by a cord through the window: for her
house was upon the town wall, and she dwelt upon the wall. 2:16 And she said unto them, Get you to the mountain, lest the
pursuers meet you; and hide yourselves there three days, until the
pursuers be returned: and afterward may ye go your way. 2:17 And the men said unto her, We will be blameless of this thine
oath which thou hast made us swear. 2:18 Behold, when we come into the land, thou shalt bind this line of
scarlet thread in the window which thou didst let us down by: and thou
shalt bring thy father, and thy mother, and thy brethren, and all thy
father's household, home unto thee. 2:19 And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of thy
house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we will
be guiltless: and whosoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood
shall be on our head, if any hand be upon him. 2:20 And if thou utter this our business, then we will be quit of
thine oath which thou hast made us to swear. 2:21 And she said, According unto your words, so be it. And she sent
them away, and they departed: and she bound the scarlet line in the
window. 2:22 And they went, and came unto the mountain, and abode there three
days, until the pursuers were returned: and the pursuers sought them
throughout all the way, but found them not. 2:23 So the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and
passed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all
things that befell them: 2:24 And they said unto Joshua, Truly the
LORD hath delivered into our hands all the land; for even all the
inhabitants of the country do faint because of us. 3:1 And Joshua rose early in the morning; and they removed from
Shittim, and came to Jordan, he and all the children of Israel, and
lodged there before they passed over. 3:2 And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went
through the host; 3:3 And they commanded the people, saying, When ye
see the ark of the covenant of the LORD your God, and the priests the
Levites bearing it, then ye shall remove from your place, and go after
it. 3:4 Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand
cubits by measure: come not near unto it, that ye may know the way by
which ye must go: for ye have not passed this way heretofore. 3:5 And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for to
morrow the LORD will do wonders among you. 3:6 And Joshua spake unto the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the
covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of
the covenant, and went before the people. 3:7 And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to magnify
thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was
with Moses, so I will be with thee. 3:8 And thou shalt command the priests that bear the ark of the
covenant, saying, When ye are come to the brink of the water of
Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan. 3:9 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear
the words of the LORD your God. 3:10 And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is
among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the Perizzites, and
the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites. 3:11 Behold, the ark of the covenant of the LORD of all the earth
passeth over before you into Jordan. 3:12 Now therefore take you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel,
out of every tribe a man. 3:13 And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of
the priests that bear the ark of the LORD, the LORD of all the earth,
shall rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be
cut off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall
stand upon an heap. 3:14 And it came to pass, when the people removed from their tents, to
pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of the covenant
before the people; 3:15 And as they that bare the ark were come unto
Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were dipped in
the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the
time of harvest,) 3:16 That the waters which came down from above
stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that is
beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the plain,
even the salt sea, failed, and were cut off: and the people passed
over right against Jericho. 3:17 And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD
stood firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the
Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people were passed
clean over Jordan. 4:1 And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over
Jordan, that the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying, 4:2 Take you twelve
men out of the people, out of every tribe a man, 4:3 And command ye
them, saying, Take you hence out of the midst of Jordan, out of the
place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and ye shall
carry them over with you, and leave them in the lodging place, where
ye shall lodge this night. 4:4 Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the
children of Israel, out of every tribe a man: 4:5 And Joshua said unto
them, Pass over before the ark of the LORD your God into the midst of
Jordan, and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder,
according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel: 4:6
That this may be a sign among you, that when your children ask their
fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these stones? 4:7
Then ye shall answer them, That the waters of Jordan were cut off
before the ark of the covenant of the LORD; when it passed over
Jordan, the waters of Jordan were cut off: and these stones shall be
for a memorial unto the children of Israel for ever. 4:8 And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up
twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the LORD spake unto
Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of
Israel, and carried them over with them unto the place where they
lodged, and laid them down there. 4:9 And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan, in the
place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the covenant
stood: and they are there unto this day. 4:10 For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan,
until everything was finished that the LORD commanded Joshua to speak
unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua: and the
people hasted and passed over. 4:11 And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over,
that the ark of the LORD passed over, and the priests, in the presence
of the people. 4:12 And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the
tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the children of Israel, as
Moses spake unto them: 4:13 About forty thousand prepared for war
passed over before the LORD unto battle, to the plains of Jericho. 4:14 On that day the LORD magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel;
and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life. 4:15 And the LORD spake unto Joshua, saying, 4:16 Command the priests
that bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of Jordan. 4:17 Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of
Jordan. 4:18 And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the
covenant of the LORD were come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the
soles of the priests' feet were lifted up unto the dry land, that the
waters of Jordan returned unto their place, and flowed over all his
banks, as they did before. 4:19 And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the
first month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho. 4:20 And those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did
Joshua pitch in Gilgal. 4:21 And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your
children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean
these stones? 4:22 Then ye shall let your children know, saying,
Israel came over this Jordan on dry land. 4:23 For the LORD your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before
you, until ye were passed over, as the LORD your God did to the Red
sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were gone over: 4:24
That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the LORD, that
it is mighty: that ye might fear the LORD your God for ever. 5:1 And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, which
were on the side of Jordan westward, and all the kings of the
Canaanites, which were by the sea, heard that the LORD had dried up
the waters of Jordan from before the children of Israel, until we were
passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them
any more, because of the children of Israel. 5:2 At that time the LORD said unto Joshua, Make thee sharp knives,
and circumcise again the children of Israel the second time. 5:3 And Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the children of
Israel at the hill of the foreskins. 5:4 And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise: All the people
that came out of Egypt, that were males, even all the men of war, died
in the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt. 5:5 Now all the people that came out were circumcised: but all the
people that were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth
out of Egypt, them they had not circumcised. 5:6 For the children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness,
till all the people that were men of war, which came out of Egypt,
were consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the LORD: unto
whom the LORD sware that he would not shew them the land, which the
LORD sware unto their fathers that he would give us, a land that
floweth with milk and honey. 5:7 And their children, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua
circumcised: for they were uncircumcised, because they had not
circumcised them by the way. 5:8 And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the
people, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were
whole. 5:9 And the LORD said unto Joshua, This day have I rolled away the
reproach of Egypt from off you. Wherefore the name of the place is
called Gilgal unto this day. 5:10 And the children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the
passover on the fourteenth day of the month at even in the plains of
Jericho. 5:11 And they did eat of the old corn of the land on the morrow after
the passover, unleavened cakes, and parched corn in the selfsame day. 5:12 And the manna ceased on the morrow after they had eaten of the
old corn of the land; neither had the children of Israel manna any
more; but they did eat of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year. 5:13 And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted
up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against
him with his sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and
said unto him, Art thou for us, or for our adversaries? 5:14 And he
said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the LORD am I now come. And
Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto
him, What saith my Lord unto his servant? 5:15 And the captain of the
LORD's host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for
the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so. 6:1 Now Jericho was straitly shut up because of the children of
Israel: none went out, and none came in. 6:2 And the LORD said unto Joshua, See, I have given into thine hand
Jericho, and the king thereof, and the mighty men of valour. 6:3 And ye shall compass the city, all ye men of war, and go round
about the city once. Thus shalt thou do six days. 6:4 And seven priests shall bear before the ark seven trumpets of
rams' horns: and the seventh day ye shall compass the city seven
times, and the priests shall blow with the trumpets. 6:5 And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long blast with
the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the
people shall shout with a great shout; and the wall of the city shall
fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up every man straight
before him. 6:6 And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said unto them,
Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven
trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of the LORD. 6:7 And he said unto the people, Pass on, and compass the city, and
let him that is armed pass on before the ark of the LORD. 6:8 And it came to pass, when Joshua had spoken unto the people, that
the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns passed on
before the LORD, and blew with the trumpets: and the ark of the
covenant of the LORD followed them. 6:9 And the armed men went before the priests that blew with the
trumpets, and the rereward came after the ark, the priests going on,
and blowing with the trumpets. 6:10 And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout,
nor make any noise with your voice, neither shall any word proceed out
of your mouth, until the day I bid you shout; then shall ye shout. 6:11 So the ark of the LORD compassed the city, going about it once:
and they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp. 6:12 And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the
ark of the LORD. 6:13 And seven priests bearing seven trumpets of rams' horns before
the ark of the LORD went on continually, and blew with the trumpets:
and the armed men went before them; but the rereward came after the
ark of the LORD, the priests going on, and blowing with the trumpets. 6:14 And the second day they compassed the city once, and returned
into the camp: so they did six days. 6:15 And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early
about the dawning of the day, and compassed the city after the same
manner seven times: only on that day they compassed the city seven
times. 6:16 And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew
with the trumpets, Joshua said unto the people, Shout; for the LORD
hath given you the city. 6:17 And the city shall be accursed, even it, and all that are
therein, to the LORD: only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all
that are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we
sent. 6:18 And ye, in any wise keep yourselves from the accursed thing, lest
ye make yourselves accursed, when ye take of the accursed thing, and
make the camp of Israel a curse, and trouble it. 6:19 But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are
consecrated unto the LORD: they shall come into the treasury of the
LORD. 6:20 So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets:
and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet,
and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down
flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight
before him, and they took the city. 6:21 And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and
woman, young and old, and ox, and sheep, and ass, with the edge of the
sword. 6:22 But Joshua had said unto the two men that had spied out the
country, Go into the harlot's house, and bring out thence the woman,
and all that she hath, as ye sware unto her. 6:23 And the young men that were spies went in, and brought out Rahab,
and her father, and her mother, and her brethren, and all that she
had; and they brought out all her kindred, and left them without the
camp of Israel. 6:24 And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was therein: only
the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they
put into the treasury of the house of the LORD. 6:25 And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot alive, and her father's
household, and all that she had; and she dwelleth in Israel even unto
this day; because she hid the messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out
Jericho. 6:26 And Joshua adjured them at that time, saying, Cursed be the man
before the LORD, that riseth up and buildeth this city Jericho: he
shall lay the foundation thereof in his firstborn, and in his youngest
son shall he set up the gates of it. 6:27 So the LORD was with Joshua; and his fame was noised throughout
all the country. 7:1 But the children of Israel committed a trespass in the accursed
thing: for Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of
Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took of the accursed thing: and the
anger of the LORD was kindled against the children of Israel. 7:2 And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Bethaven,
on the east of Bethel, and spake unto them, saying, Go up and view the
country. And the men went up and viewed Ai. 7:3 And they returned to Joshua, and said unto him, Let not all the
people go up; but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite
Ai; and make not all the people to labour thither; for they are but
few. 7:4 So there went up thither of the people about three thousand men:
and they fled before the men of Ai. 7:5 And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty and six men: for they
chased them from before the gate even unto Shebarim, and smote them in
the going down: wherefore the hearts of the people melted, and became
as water. 7:6 And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face
before the ark of the LORD until the eventide, he and the elders of
Israel, and put dust upon their heads. 7:7 And Joshua said, Alas, O LORD God, wherefore hast thou at all
brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the
Amorites, to destroy us? would to God we had been content, and dwelt
on the other side Jordan! 7:8 O LORD, what shall I say, when Israel
turneth their backs before their enemies! 7:9 For the Canaanites and
all the inhabitants of the land shall hear of it, and shall environ us
round, and cut off our name from the earth: and what wilt thou do unto
thy great name? 7:10 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Get thee up;
wherefore liest thou thus upon thy face? 7:11 Israel hath sinned, and
they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them: for
they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and
dissembled also, and they have put it even among their own stuff. 7:12 Therefore the children of Israel could not stand before their
enemies, but turned their backs before their enemies, because they
were accursed: neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy
the accursed from among you. 7:13 Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against to
morrow: for thus saith the LORD God of Israel, There is an accursed
thing in the midst of thee, O Israel: thou canst not stand before
thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you. 7:14 In the morning therefore ye shall be brought according to your
tribes: and it shall be, that the tribe which the LORD taketh shall
come according to the families thereof; and the family which the LORD
shall take shall come by households; and the household which the LORD
shall take shall come man by man. 7:15 And it shall be, that he that is taken with the accursed thing
shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath: because he hath
transgressed the covenant of the LORD, and because he hath wrought
folly in Israel. 7:16 So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel by
their tribes; and the tribe of Judah was taken: 7:17 And he brought
the family of Judah; and he took the family of the Zarhites: and he
brought the family of the Zarhites man by man; and Zabdi was taken:
7:18 And he brought his household man by man; and Achan, the son of
Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was
taken. 7:19 And Joshua said unto Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to
the LORD God of Israel, and make confession unto him; and tell me now
what thou hast done; hide it not from me. 7:20 And Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed I have sinned against
the LORD God of Israel, and thus and thus have I done: 7:21 When I saw
among the spoils a goodly Babylonish garment, and two hundred shekels
of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted
them, and took them; and, behold, they are hid in the earth in the
midst of my tent, and the silver under it. 7:22 So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto the tent; and,
behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it. 7:23 And they took them out of the midst of the tent, and brought them
unto Joshua, and unto all the children of Israel, and laid them out
before the LORD. 7:24 And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah,
and the silver, and the garment, and the wedge of gold, and his sons,
and his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his
tent, and all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of
Achor. 7:25 And Joshua said, Why hast thou troubled us? the LORD shall
trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and
burned them with fire, after they had stoned them with stones. 7:26 And they raised over him a great heap of stones unto this day. So
the LORD turned from the fierceness of his anger. Wherefore the name
of that place was called, The valley of Achor, unto this day. 8:1 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed:
take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai: see, I
have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city,
and his land: 8:2 And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst
unto Jericho and her king: only the spoil thereof, and the cattle
thereof, shall ye take for a prey unto yourselves: lay thee an ambush
for the city behind it. 8:3 So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai:
and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour, and sent
them away by night. 8:4 And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in wait
against the city, even behind the city: go not very far from the city,
but be ye all ready: 8:5 And I, and all the people that are with me,
will approach unto the city: and it shall come to pass, when they come
out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them, 8:6
(For they will come out after us) till we have drawn them from the
city; for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first:
therefore we will flee before them. 8:7 Then ye shall rise up from the ambush, and seize upon the city:
for the LORD your God will deliver it into your hand. 8:8 And it shall be, when ye have taken the city, that ye shall set
the city on fire: according to the commandment of the LORD shall ye
do. See, I have commanded you. 8:9 Joshua therefore sent them forth: and they went to lie in ambush,
and abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai: but Joshua
lodged that night among the people. 8:10 And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people,
and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai. 8:11 And all the people, even the people of war that were with him,
went up, and drew nigh, and came before the city, and pitched on the
north side of Ai: now there was a valley between them and Ai. 8:12 And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in
ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city. 8:13 And when they had set the people, even all the host that was on
the north of the city, and their liers in wait on the west of the
city, Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley. 8:14 And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hasted
and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to
battle, he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain;
but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the
city. 8:15 And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before
them, and fled by the way of the wilderness. 8:16 And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue
after them: and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from
the city. 8:17 And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel, that went not out
after Israel: and they left the city open, and pursued after Israel. 8:18 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Stretch out the spear that is in
thy hand toward Ai; for I will give it into thine hand. And Joshua
stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the city. 8:19 And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as
soon as he had stretched out his hand: and they entered into the city,
and took it, and hasted and set the city on fire. 8:20 And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold,
the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to
flee this way or that way: and the people that fled to the wilderness
turned back upon the pursuers. 8:21 And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the
city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again,
and slew the men of Ai. 8:22 And the other issued out of the city against them; so they were
in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side: and
they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape. 8:23 And the king of Ai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua. 8:24 And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all
the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness wherein they
chased them, and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword,
until they were consumed, that all the Israelites returned unto Ai,
and smote it with the edge of the sword. 8:25 And so it was, that all that fell that day, both of men and
women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai. 8:26 For Joshua drew not his hand back, wherewith he stretched out the
spear, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai. 8:27 Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for a prey
unto themselves, according unto the word of the LORD which he
commanded Joshua. 8:28 And Joshua burnt Ai, and made it an heap for ever, even a
desolation unto this day. 8:29 And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide: and as
soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take his
carcase down from the tree, and cast it at the entering of the gate of
the city, and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth
unto this day. 8:30 Then Joshua built an altar unto the LORD God of Israel in mount
Ebal, 8:31 As Moses the servant of the LORD commanded the children of
Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of
whole stones, over which no man hath lift up any iron: and they
offered thereon burnt offerings unto the LORD, and sacrificed peace
offerings. 8:32 And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses,
which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel. 8:33 And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges,
stood on this side the ark and on that side before the priests the
Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant of the LORD, as well the
stranger, as he that was born among them; half of them over against
mount Gerizim, and half of them over against mount Ebal; as Moses the
servant of the LORD had commanded before, that they should bless the
people of Israel. 8:34 And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessings and
cursings, according to all that is written in the book of the law. 8:35 There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua
read not before all the congregation of Israel, with the women, and
the little ones, and the strangers that were conversant among them. 9:1 And it came to pass, when all the kings which were on this side
Jordan, in the hills, and in the valleys, and in all the coasts of the
great sea over against Lebanon, the Hittite, and the Amorite, the
Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, heard thereof;
9:2 That they gathered themselves together, to fight with Joshua and
with Israel, with one accord. 9:3 And when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done unto
Jericho and to Ai, 9:4 They did work wilily, and went and made as if
they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their asses, and
wine bottles, old, and rent, and bound up; 9:5 And old shoes and
clouted upon their feet, and old garments upon them; and all the bread
of their provision was dry and mouldy. 9:6 And they went to Joshua unto the camp at Gilgal, and said unto
him, and to the men of Israel, We be come from a far country: now
therefore make ye a league with us. 9:7 And the men of Israel said unto the Hivites, Peradventure ye dwell
among us; and how shall we make a league with you? 9:8 And they said
unto Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said unto them, Who are
ye? and from whence come ye? 9:9 And they said unto him, From a very
far country thy servants are come because of the name of the LORD thy
God: for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,
9:10 And all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites, that were
beyond Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan,
which was at Ashtaroth. 9:11 Wherefore our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spake
to us, saying, Take victuals with you for the journey, and go to meet
them, and say unto them, We are your servants: therefore now make ye a
league with us. 9:12 This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on
the day we came forth to go unto you; but now, behold, it is dry, and
it is mouldy: 9:13 And these bottles of wine, which we filled, were
new; and, behold, they be rent: and these our garments and our shoes
are become old by reason of the very long journey. 9:14 And the men took of their victuals, and asked not counsel at the
mouth of the LORD. 9:15 And Joshua made peace with them, and made a league with them, to
let them live: and the princes of the congregation sware unto them. 9:16 And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made
a league with them, that they heard that they were their neighbours,
and that they dwelt among them. 9:17 And the children of Israel journeyed, and came unto their cities
on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and
Beeroth, and Kirjathjearim. 9:18 And the children of Israel smote them not, because the princes of
the congregation had sworn unto them by the LORD God of Israel. And
all the congregation murmured against the princes. 9:19 But all the princes said unto all the congregation, We have sworn
unto them by the LORD God of Israel: now therefore we may not touch
them. 9:20 This we will do to them; we will even let them live, lest wrath
be upon us, because of the oath which we sware unto them. 9:21 And the princes said unto them, Let them live; but let them be
hewers of wood and drawers of water unto all the congregation; as the
princes had promised them. 9:22 And Joshua called for them, and he spake unto them, saying,
Wherefore have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you; when
ye dwell among us? 9:23 Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall
none of you be freed from being bondmen, and hewers of wood and
drawers of water for the house of my God. 9:24 And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told
thy servants, how that the LORD thy God commanded his servant Moses to
give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land
from before you, therefore we were sore afraid of our lives because of
you, and have done this thing. 9:25 And now, behold, we are in thine hand: as it seemeth good and
right unto thee to do unto us, do. 9:26 And so did he unto them, and delivered them out of the hand of
the children of Israel, that they slew them not. 9:27 And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water
for the congregation, and for the altar of the LORD, even unto this
day, in the place which he should choose. 10:1 Now it came to pass, when Adonizedec king of Jerusalem had heard
how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it; as he had done
to Jericho and her king, so he had done to Ai and her king; and how
the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among
them; 10:2 That they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city,
as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and
all the men thereof were mighty. 10:3 Wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem, sent unto Hoham king of
Hebron, and unto Piram king of Jarmuth, and unto Japhia king of
Lachish, and unto Debir king of Eglon, saying, 10:4 Come up unto me,
and help me, that we may smite Gibeon: for it hath made peace with
Joshua and with the children of Israel. 10:5 Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem,
the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king
of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all
their hosts, and encamped before Gibeon, and made war against it. 10:6 And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal,
saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly,
and save us, and help us: for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell
in the mountains are gathered together against us. 10:7 So Joshua ascended from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war
with him, and all the mighty men of valour. 10:8 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Fear them not: for I have
delivered them into thine hand; there shall not a man of them stand
before thee. 10:9 Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly, and went up from Gilgal
all night. 10:10 And the LORD discomfited them before Israel, and slew them with
a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them along the way that goeth
up to Bethhoron, and smote them to Azekah, and unto Makkedah. 10:11 And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, and were
in the going down to Bethhoron, that the LORD cast down great stones
from heaven upon them unto Azekah, and they died: they were more which
died with hailstones than they whom the children of Israel slew with
the sword. 10:12 Then spake Joshua to the LORD in the day when the LORD delivered
up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the
sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon; and thou, Moon, in
the valley of Ajalon. 10:13 And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the people
had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the
book of Jasher? So the sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and
hasted not to go down about a whole day. 10:14 And there was no day like that before it or after it, that the
LORD hearkened unto the voice of a man: for the LORD fought for
Israel. 10:15 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to
Gilgal. 10:16 But these five kings fled, and hid themselves in a cave at
Makkedah. 10:17 And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hid in
a cave at Makkedah. 10:18 And Joshua said, Roll great stones upon the mouth of the cave,
and set men by it for to keep them: 10:19 And stay ye not, but pursue
after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them; suffer them not to
enter into their cities: for the LORD your God hath delivered them
into your hand. 10:20 And it came to pass, when Joshua and the children of Israel had
made an end of slaying them with a very great slaughter, till they
were consumed, that the rest which remained of them entered into
fenced cities. 10:21 And all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in
peace: none moved his tongue against any of the children of Israel. 10:22 Then said Joshua, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out
those five kings unto me out of the cave. 10:23 And they did so, and brought forth those five kings unto him out
of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of
Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, and the king of Eglon. 10:24 And it came to pass, when they brought out those kings unto
Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said unto
the captains of the men of war which went with him, Come near, put
your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put
their feet upon the necks of them. 10:25 And Joshua said unto them, Fear not, nor be dismayed, be strong
and of good courage: for thus shall the LORD do to all your enemies
against whom ye fight. 10:26 And afterward Joshua smote them, and slew them, and hanged them
on five trees: and they were hanging upon the trees until the evening. 10:27 And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun,
that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast
them into the cave wherein they had been hid, and laid great stones in
the cave's mouth, which remain until this very day. 10:28 And that day Joshua took Makkedah, and smote it with the edge of
the sword, and the king thereof he utterly destroyed, them, and all
the souls that were therein; he let none remain: and he did to the
king of Makkedah as he did unto the king of Jericho. 10:29 Then Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, unto
Libnah, and fought against Libnah: 10:30 And the LORD delivered it
also, and the king thereof, into the hand of Israel; and he smote it
with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein; he
let none remain in it; but did unto the king thereof as he did unto
the king of Jericho. 10:31 And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, unto
Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:32 And the
LORD delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel, which took it on the
second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls
that were therein, according to all that he had done to Libnah. 10:33 Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish; and Joshua
smote him and his people, until he had left him none remaining. 10:34 And from Lachish Joshua passed unto Eglon, and all Israel with
him; and they encamped against it, and fought against it: 10:35 And
they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and
all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed that day,
according to all that he had done to Lachish. 10:36 And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, unto
Hebron; and they fought against it: 10:37 And they took it, and smote
it with the edge of the sword, and the king thereof, and all the
cities thereof, and all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon; but destroyed
it utterly, and all the souls that were therein. 10:38 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir; and
fought against it: 10:39 And he took it, and the king thereof, and all
the cities thereof; and they smote them with the edge of the sword,
and utterly destroyed all the souls that were therein; he left none
remaining: as he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the
king thereof; as he had done also to Libnah, and to her king. 10:40 So Joshua smote all the country of the hills, and of the south,
and of the vale, and of the springs, and all their kings: he left none
remaining, but utterly destroyed all that breathed, as the LORD God of
Israel commanded. 10:41 And Joshua smote them from Kadeshbarnea even unto Gaza, and all
the country of Goshen, even unto Gibeon. 10:42 And all these kings and their land did Joshua take at one time,
because the LORD God of Israel fought for Israel. 10:43 And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, unto the camp to
Gilgal. 11:1 And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor had heard those
things, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of
Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph, 11:2 And to the kings that were
on the north of the mountains, and of the plains south of Chinneroth,
and in the valley, and in the borders of Dor on the west, 11:3 And to
the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and to the Amorite, and the
Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the mountains, and to
the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpeh. 11:4 And they went out, they and all their hosts with them, much
people, even as the sand that is upon the sea shore in multitude, with
horses and chariots very many. 11:5 And when all these kings were met together, they came and pitched
together at the waters of Merom, to fight against Israel. 11:6 And the LORD said unto Joshua, Be not afraid because of them: for
to morrow about this time will I deliver them up all slain before
Israel: thou shalt hough their horses, and burn their chariots with
fire. 11:7 So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them
by the waters of Merom suddenly; and they fell upon them. 11:8 And the LORD delivered them into the hand of Israel, who smote
them, and chased them unto great Zidon, and unto Misrephothmaim, and
unto the valley of Mizpeh eastward; and they smote them, until they
left them none remaining. 11:9 And Joshua did unto them as the LORD bade him: he houghed their
horses, and burnt their chariots with fire. 11:10 And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote
the king thereof with the sword: for Hazor beforetime was the head of
all those kingdoms. 11:11 And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of
the sword, utterly destroying them: there was not any left to breathe:
and he burnt Hazor with fire. 11:12 And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them,
did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and he
utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of the LORD commanded. 11:13 But as for the cities that stood still in their strength, Israel
burned none of them, save Hazor only; that did Joshua burn. 11:14 And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the children
of Israel took for a prey unto themselves; but every man they smote
with the edge of the sword, until they had destroyed them, neither
left they any to breathe. 11:15 As the LORD commanded Moses his servant, so did Moses command
Joshua, and so did Joshua; he left nothing undone of all that the LORD
commanded Moses. 11:16 So Joshua took all that land, the hills, and all the south
country, and all the land of Goshen, and the valley, and the plain,
and the mountain of Israel, and the valley of the same; 11:17 Even
from the mount Halak, that goeth up to Seir, even unto Baalgad in the
valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon: and all their kings he took, and
smote them, and slew them. 11:18 Joshua made war a long time with all those kings. 11:19 There was not a city that made peace with the children of
Israel, save the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon: all other they
took in battle. 11:20 For it was of the LORD to harden their hearts, that they should
come against Israel in battle, that he might destroy them utterly, and
that they might have no favour, but that he might destroy them, as the
LORD commanded Moses. 11:21 And at that time came Joshua, and cut off the Anakims from the
mountains, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the
mountains of Judah, and from all the mountains of Israel: Joshua
destroyed them utterly with their cities. 11:22 There was none of the Anakims left in the land of the children
of Israel: only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod, there remained. 11:23 So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that the LORD
said unto Moses; and Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel
according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land rested from
war. 12:1 Now these are the kings of the land, which the children of Israel
smote, and possessed their land on the other side Jordan toward the
rising of the sun, from the river Arnon unto mount Hermon, and all the
plain on the east: 12:2 Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in
Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is upon the bank of the river
Arnon, and from the middle of the river, and from half Gilead, even
unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of Ammon;
12:3 And from the plain to the sea of Chinneroth on the east, and unto
the sea of the plain, even the salt sea on the east, the way to
Bethjeshimoth; and from the south, under Ashdothpisgah: 12:4 And the
coast of Og king of Bashan, which was of the remnant of the giants,
that dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei, 12:5 And reigned in mount
Hermon, and in Salcah, and in all Bashan, unto the border of the
Geshurites and the Maachathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon
king of Heshbon. 12:6 Them did Moses the servant of the LORD and the children of Israel
smite: and Moses the servant of the LORD gave it for a possession unto
the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh. 12:7 And these are the kings of the country which Joshua and the
children of Israel smote on this side Jordan on the west, from Baalgad
in the valley of Lebanon even unto the mount Halak, that goeth up to
Seir; which Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel for a possession
according to their divisions; 12:8 In the mountains, and in the
valleys, and in the plains, and in the springs, and in the wilderness,
and in the south country; the Hittites, the Amorites, and the
Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites: 12:9 The
king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one;
12:10 The king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one; 12:11 The
king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one; 12:12 The king of
Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one; 12:13 The king of Debir, one; the
king of Geder, one; 12:14 The king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad,
one; 12:15 The king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one; 12:16
The king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one; 12:17 The king of
Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one; 12:18 The king of Aphek, one;
the king of Lasharon, one; 12:19 The king of Madon, one; the king of
Hazor, one; 12:20 The king of Shimronmeron, one; the king of Achshaph,
one; 12:21 The king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one; 12:22
The king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam of Carmel, one; 12:23 The
king of Dor in the coast of Dor, one; the king of the nations of
Gilgal, one; 12:24 The king of Tirzah, one: all the kings thirty and
one. 13:1 Now Joshua was old and stricken in years; and the LORD said unto
him, Thou art old and stricken in years, and there remaineth yet very
much land to be possessed. 13:2 This is the land that yet remaineth: all the borders of the
Philistines, and all Geshuri, 13:3 From Sihor, which is before Egypt,
even unto the borders of Ekron northward, which is counted to the
Canaanite: five lords of the Philistines; the Gazathites, and the
Ashdothites, the Eshkalonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also
the Avites: 13:4 From the south, all the land of the Canaanites, and
Mearah that is beside the Sidonians unto Aphek, to the borders of the
Amorites: 13:5 And the land of the Giblites, and all Lebanon, toward
the sunrising, from Baalgad under mount Hermon unto the entering into
Hamath. 13:6 All the inhabitants of the hill country from Lebanon unto
Misrephothmaim, and all the Sidonians, them will I drive out from
before the children of Israel: only divide thou it by lot unto the
Israelites for an inheritance, as I have commanded thee. 13:7 Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance unto the nine
tribes, and the half tribe of Manasseh, 13:8 With whom the Reubenites
and the Gadites have received their inheritance, which Moses gave
them, beyond Jordan eastward, even as Moses the servant of the LORD
gave them; 13:9 From Aroer, that is upon the bank of the river Arnon,
and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the plain of
Medeba unto Dibon; 13:10 And all the cities of Sihon king of the
Amorites, which reigned in Heshbon, unto the border of the children of
Ammon; 13:11 And Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and
Maachathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan unto Salcah; 13:12
All the kingdom of Og in Bashan, which reigned in Ashtaroth and in
Edrei, who remained of the remnant of the giants: for these did Moses
smite, and cast them out. 13:13 Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Geshurites,
nor the Maachathites: but the Geshurites and the Maachathites dwell
among the Israelites until this day. 13:14 Only unto the tribes of Levi he gave none inheritance; the
sacrifices of the LORD God of Israel made by fire are their
inheritance, as he said unto them. 13:15 And Moses gave unto the tribe of the children of Reuben
inheritance according to their families. 13:16 And their coast was from Aroer, that is on the bank of the river
Arnon, and the city that is in the midst of the river, and all the
plain by Medeba; 13:17 Heshbon, and all her cities that are in the
plain; Dibon, and Bamothbaal, and Bethbaalmeon, 13:18 And Jahaza, and
Kedemoth, and Mephaath, 13:19 And Kirjathaim, and Sibmah, and
Zarethshahar in the mount of the valley, 13:20 And Bethpeor, and
Ashdothpisgah, and Bethjeshimoth, 13:21 And all the cities of the
plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, which
reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the princes of Midian, Evi,
and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, which were dukes of Sihon,
dwelling in the country. 13:22 Balaam also the son of Beor, the soothsayer, did the children of
Israel slay with the sword among them that were slain by them. 13:23 And the border of the children of Reuben was Jordan, and the
border thereof. This was the inheritance of the children of Reuben
after their families, the cities and the villages thereof. 13:24 And Moses gave inheritance unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the
children of Gad according to their families. 13:25 And their coast was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and
half the land of the children of Ammon, unto Aroer that is before
Rabbah; 13:26 And from Heshbon unto Ramathmizpeh, and Betonim; and
from Mahanaim unto the border of Debir; 13:27 And in the valley,
Betharam, and Bethnimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the
kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, Jordan and his border, even unto the
edge of the sea of Chinnereth on the other side Jordan eastward. 13:28 This is the inheritance of the children of Gad after their
families, the cities, and their villages. 13:29 And Moses gave inheritance unto the half tribe of Manasseh: and
this was the possession of the half tribe of the children of Manasseh
by their families. 13:30 And their coast was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom
of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan,
threescore cities: 13:31 And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei,
cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were pertaining unto the
children of Machir the son of Manasseh, even to the one half of the
children of Machir by their families. 13:32 These are the countries which Moses did distribute for
inheritance in the plains of Moab, on the other side Jordan, by
Jericho, eastward. 13:33 But unto the tribe of Levi Moses gave not any inheritance: the
LORD God of Israel was their inheritance, as he said unto them. 14:1 And these are the countries which the children of Israel
inherited in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua
the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel, distributed for inheritance to them. 14:2 By lot was their inheritance, as the LORD commanded by the hand
of Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half tribe. 14:3 For Moses had given the inheritance of two tribes and an half
tribe on the other side Jordan: but unto the Levites he gave none
inheritance among them. 14:4 For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim:
therefore they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities
to dwell in, with their suburbs for their cattle and for their
substance. 14:5 As the LORD commanded Moses, so the children of Israel did, and
they divided the land. 14:6 Then the children of Judah came unto Joshua in Gilgal: and Caleb
the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite said unto him, Thou knowest the
thing that the LORD said unto Moses the man of God concerning me and
thee in Kadeshbarnea. 14:7 Forty years old was I when Moses the servant of the LORD sent me
from Kadeshbarnea to espy out the land; and I brought him word again
as it was in mine heart. 14:8 Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me made the heart of
the people melt: but I wholly followed the LORD my God. 14:9 And Moses sware on that day, saying, Surely the land whereon thy
feet have trodden shall be thine inheritance, and thy children's for
ever, because thou hast wholly followed the LORD my God. 14:10 And now, behold, the LORD hath kept me alive, as he said, these
forty and five years, even since the LORD spake this word unto Moses,
while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now, lo,
I am this day fourscore and five years old. 14:11 As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses
sent me: as my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war,
both to go out, and to come in. 14:12 Now therefore give me this mountain, whereof the LORD spake in
that day; for thou heardest in that day how the Anakims were there,
and that the cities were great and fenced: if so be the LORD will be
with me, then I shall be able to drive them out, as the LORD said. 14:13 And Joshua blessed him, and gave unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh
Hebron for an inheritance. 14:14 Hebron therefore became the inheritance of Caleb the son of
Jephunneh the Kenezite unto this day, because that he wholly followed
the LORD God of Israel. 14:15 And the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba; which Arba was a
great man among the Anakims. And the land had rest from war. 15:1 This then was the lot of the tribe of the children of Judah by
their families; even to the border of Edom the wilderness of Zin
southward was the uttermost part of the south coast. 15:2 And their south border was from the shore of the salt sea, from
the bay that looketh southward: 15:3 And it went out to the south side
to Maalehacrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and ascended up on the
south side unto Kadeshbarnea, and passed along to Hezron, and went up
to Adar, and fetched a compass to Karkaa: 15:4 From thence it passed
toward Azmon, and went out unto the river of Egypt; and the goings out
of that coast were at the sea: this shall be your south coast. 15:5 And the east border was the salt sea, even unto the end of
Jordan. And their border in the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at
the uttermost part of Jordan: 15:6 And the border went up to
Bethhogla, and passed along by the north of Betharabah; and the border
went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben: 15:7 And the border
went up toward Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward,
looking toward Gilgal, that is before the going up to Adummim, which
is on the south side of the river: and the border passed toward the
waters of Enshemesh, and the goings out thereof were at Enrogel: 15:8
And the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom unto the
south side of the Jebusite; the same is Jerusalem: and the border went
up to the top of the mountain that lieth before the valley of Hinnom
westward, which is at the end of the valley of the giants northward:
15:9 And the border was drawn from the top of the hill unto the
fountain of the water of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount
Ephron; and the border was drawn to Baalah, which is Kirjathjearim:
15:10 And the border compassed from Baalah westward unto mount Seir,
and passed along unto the side of mount Jearim, which is Chesalon, on
the north side, and went down to Bethshemesh, and passed on to Timnah:
15:11 And the border went out unto the side of Ekron northward: and
the border was drawn to Shicron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and
went out unto Jabneel; and the goings out of the border were at the
sea. 15:12 And the west border was to the great sea, and the coast thereof. This is the coast of the children of Judah round about according to
their families. 15:13 And unto Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a part among the
children of Judah, according to the commandment of the LORD to Joshua,
even the city of Arba the father of Anak, which city is Hebron. 15:14 And Caleb drove thence the three sons of Anak, Sheshai, and
Ahiman, and Talmai, the children of Anak. 15:15 And he went up thence to the inhabitants of Debir: and the name
of Debir before was Kirjathsepher. 15:16 And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to
him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife. 15:17 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it: and
he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife. 15:18 And it came to pass, as she came unto him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted off her ass; and Caleb said
unto her, What wouldest thou? 15:19 Who answered, Give me a blessing;
for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs, and the nether springs. 15:20 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Judah
according to their families. 15:21 And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah
toward the coast of Edom southward were Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
15:22 And Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah, 15:23 And Kedesh, and Hazor,
and Ithnan, 15:24 Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth, 15:25 And Hazor,
Hadattah, and Kerioth, and Hezron, which is Hazor, 15:26 Amam, and
Shema, and Moladah, 15:27 And Hazargaddah, and Heshmon, and Bethpalet,
15:28 And Hazarshual, and Beersheba, and Bizjothjah, 15:29 Baalah, and
Iim, and Azem, 15:30 And Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah, 15:31 And
Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah, 15:32 And Lebaoth, and Shilhim,
and Ain, and Rimmon: all the cities are twenty and nine, with their
villages: 15:33 And in the valley, Eshtaol, and Zoreah, and Ashnah,
15:34 And Zanoah, and Engannim, Tappuah, and Enam, 15:35 Jarmuth, and
Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah, 15:36 And Sharaim, and Adithaim, and
Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages: 15:37
Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdalgad, 15:38 And Dilean, and Mizpeh, and
Joktheel, 15:39 Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon, 15:40 And Cabbon, and
Lahmam, and Kithlish, 15:41 And Gederoth, Bethdagon, and Naamah, and
Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages: 15:42 Libnah, and Ether,
and Ashan, 15:43 And Jiphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib, 15:44 And Keilah,
and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages: 15:45
Ekron, with her towns and her villages: 15:46 From Ekron even unto the
sea, all that lay near Ashdod, with their villages: 15:47 Ashdod with
her towns and her villages, Gaza with her towns and her villages, unto
the river of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border thereof: 15:48
And in the mountains, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh, 15:49 And Dannah,
and Kirjathsannah, which is Debir, 15:50 And Anab, and Eshtemoh, and
Anim, 15:51 And Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their
villages: 15:52 Arab, and Dumah, and Eshean, 15:53 And Janum, and
Bethtappuah, and Aphekah, 15:54 And Humtah, and Kirjatharba, which is
Hebron, and Zior; nine cities with their villages: 15:55 Maon, Carmel,
and Ziph, and Juttah, 15:56 And Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,
15:57 Cain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages: 15:58
Halhul, Bethzur, and Gedor, 15:59 And Maarath, and Bethanoth, and
Eltekon; six cities with their villages: 15:60 Kirjathbaal, which is
Kirjathjearim, and Rabbah; two cities with their villages: 15:61 In
the wilderness, Betharabah, Middin, and Secacah, 15:62 And Nibshan,
and the city of Salt, and Engedi; six cities with their villages. 15:63 As for the Jebusites the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the children
of Judah could not drive them out; but the Jebusites dwell with the
children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day. 16:1 And the lot of the children of Joseph fell from Jordan by
Jericho, unto the water of Jericho on the east, to the wilderness that
goeth up from Jericho throughout mount Bethel, 16:2 And goeth out from
Bethel to Luz, and passeth along unto the borders of Archi to Ataroth,
16:3 And goeth down westward to the coast of Japhleti, unto the coast
of Bethhoron the nether, and to Gezer; and the goings out thereof are
at the sea. 16:4 So the children of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their
inheritance. 16:5 And the border of the children of Ephraim according to their
families was thus: even the border of their inheritance on the east
side was Atarothaddar, unto Bethhoron the upper; 16:6 And the border
went out toward the sea to Michmethah on the north side; and the
border went about eastward unto Taanathshiloh, and passed by it on the
east to Janohah; 16:7 And it went down from Janohah to Ataroth, and to
Naarath, and came to Jericho, and went out at Jordan. 16:8 The border went out from Tappuah westward unto the river Kanah;
and the goings out thereof were at the sea. This is the inheritance of
the tribe of the children of Ephraim by their families. 16:9 And the separate cities for the children of Ephraim were among
the inheritance of the children of Manasseh, all the cities with their
villages. 16:10 And they drave not out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer: but
the Canaanites dwell among the Ephraimites unto this day, and serve
under tribute. 17:1 There was also a lot for the tribe of Manasseh; for he was the
firstborn of Joseph; to wit, for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the
father of Gilead: because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead
and Bashan. 17:2 There was also a lot for the rest of the children of Manasseh by
their families; for the children of Abiezer, and for the children of
Helek, and for the children of Asriel, and for the children of
Shechem, and for the children of Hepher, and for the children of
Shemida: these were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph by
their families. 17:3 But Zelophehad, the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of
Machir, the son of Manasseh, had no sons, but daughters: and these are
the names of his daughters, Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and
Tirzah. 17:4 And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua
the son of Nun, and before the princes, saying, The LORD commanded
Moses to give us an inheritance among our brethren. Therefore
according to the commandment of the LORD he gave them an inheritance
among the brethren of their father. 17:5 And there fell ten portions to Manasseh, beside the land of
Gilead and Bashan, which were on the other side Jordan; 17:6 Because
the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons: and the
rest of Manasseh's sons had the land of Gilead. 17:7 And the coast of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethah, that
lieth before Shechem; and the border went along on the right hand unto
the inhabitants of Entappuah. 17:8 Now Manasseh had the land of Tappuah: but Tappuah on the border
of Manasseh belonged to the children of Ephraim; 17:9 And the coast
descended unto the river Kanah, southward of the river: these cities
of Ephraim are among the cities of Manasseh: the coast of Manasseh
also was on the north side of the river, and the outgoings of it were
at the sea: 17:10 Southward it was Ephraim's, and northward it was
Manasseh's, and the sea is his border; and they met together in Asher
on the north, and in Issachar on the east. 17:11 And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher Bethshean and her
towns, and Ibleam and her towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and her
towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and her towns, and the inhabitants
of Taanach and her towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and her
towns, even three countries. 17:12 Yet the children of Manasseh could not drive out the inhabitants
of those cities; but the Canaanites would dwell in that land. 17:13 Yet it came to pass, when the children of Israel were waxen
strong, that they put the Canaanites to tribute, but did not utterly
drive them out. 17:14 And the children of Joseph spake unto Joshua, saying, Why hast
thou given me but one lot and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a
great people, forasmuch as the LORD hath blessed me hitherto? 17:15
And Joshua answered them, If thou be a great people, then get thee up
to the wood country, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the
Perizzites and of the giants, if mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee. 17:16 And the children of Joseph said, The hill is not enough for us:
and all the Canaanites that dwell in the land of the valley have
chariots of iron, both they who are of Bethshean and her towns, and
they who are of the valley of Jezreel. 17:17 And Joshua spake unto the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and
to Manasseh, saying, Thou art a great people, and hast great power:
thou shalt not have one lot only: 17:18 But the mountain shall be
thine; for it is a wood, and thou shalt cut it down: and the outgoings
of it shall be thine: for thou shalt drive out the Canaanites, though
they have iron chariots, and though they be strong. 18:1 And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled
together at Shiloh, and set up the tabernacle of the congregation
there. And the land was subdued before them. 18:2 And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes,
which had not yet received their inheritance. 18:3 And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, How long are ye
slack to go to possess the land, which the LORD God of your fathers
hath given you? 18:4 Give out from among you three men for each
tribe: and I will send them, and they shall rise, and go through the
land, and describe it according to the inheritance of them; and they
shall come again to me. 18:5 And they shall divide it into seven parts: Judah shall abide in
their coast on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their
coasts on the north. 18:6 Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts, and bring
the description hither to me, that I may cast lots for you here before
the LORD our God. 18:7 But the Levites have no part among you; for the priesthood of the
LORD is their inheritance: and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of
Manasseh, have received their inheritance beyond Jordan on the east,
which Moses the servant of the LORD gave them. 18:8 And the men arose, and went away: and Joshua charged them that
went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and
describe it, and come again to me, that I may here cast lots for you
before the LORD in Shiloh. 18:9 And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by
cities into seven parts in a book, and came again to Joshua to the
host at Shiloh. 18:10 And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the LORD: and
there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according to
their divisions. 18:11 And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up
according to their families: and the coast of their lot came forth
between the children of Judah and the children of Joseph. 18:12 And their border on the north side was from Jordan; and the
border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side, and went up
through the mountains westward; and the goings out thereof were at the
wilderness of Bethaven. 18:13 And the border went over from thence toward Luz, to the side of
Luz, which is Bethel, southward; and the border descended to
Atarothadar, near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether
Bethhoron. 18:14 And the border was drawn thence, and compassed the corner of the
sea southward, from the hill that lieth before Bethhoron southward;
and the goings out thereof were at Kirjathbaal, which is
Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of Judah: this was the west
quarter. 18:15 And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim, and the
border went out on the west, and went out to the well of waters of
Nephtoah: 18:16 And the border came down to the end of the mountain
that lieth before the valley of the son of Hinnom, and which is in the
valley of the giants on the north, and descended to the valley of
Hinnom, to the side of Jebusi on the south, and descended to Enrogel,
18:17 And was drawn from the north, and went forth to Enshemesh, and
went forth toward Geliloth, which is over against the going up of
Adummim, and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben, 18:18
And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward, and
went down unto Arabah: 18:19 And the border passed along to the side
of Bethhoglah northward: and the outgoings of the border were at the
north bay of the salt sea at the south end of Jordan: this was the
south coast. 18:20 And Jordan was the border of it on the east side. This was the
inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts thereof round
about, according to their families. 18:21 Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin
according to their families were Jericho, and Bethhoglah, and the
valley of Keziz, 18:22 And Betharabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel, 18:23
And Avim, and Pharah, and Ophrah, 18:24 And Chepharhaammonai, and
Ophni, and Gaba; twelve cities with their villages: 18:25 Gibeon, and
Ramah, and Beeroth, 18:26 And Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah, 18:27
And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah, 18:28 And Zelah, Eleph, and
Jebusi, which is Jerusalem, Gibeath, and Kirjath; fourteen cities with
their villages. This is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin
according to their families. 19:1 And the second lot came forth to Simeon, even for the tribe of
the children of Simeon according to their families: and their
inheritance was within the inheritance of the children of Judah. 19:2 And they had in their inheritance Beersheba, and Sheba, and
Moladah, 19:3 And Hazarshual, and Balah, and Azem, 19:4 And Eltolad,
and Bethul, and Hormah, 19:5 And Ziklag, and Bethmarcaboth, and
Hazarsusah, 19:6 And Bethlebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities and
their villages: 19:7 Ain, Remmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities
and their villages: 19:8 And all the villages that were round about
these cities to Baalathbeer, Ramath of the south. This is the
inheritance of the tribe of the children of Simeon according to their
families. 19:9 Out of the portion of the children of Judah was the inheritance
of the children of Simeon: for the part of the children of Judah was
too much for them: therefore the children of Simeon had their
inheritance within the inheritance of them. 19:10 And the third lot came up for the children of Zebulun according
to their families: and the border of their inheritance was unto Sarid:
19:11 And their border went up toward the sea, and Maralah, and
reached to Dabbasheth, and reached to the river that is before
Jokneam; 19:12 And turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising
unto the border of Chislothtabor, and then goeth out to Daberath, and
goeth up to Japhia, 19:13 And from thence passeth on along on the east
to Gittahhepher, to Ittahkazin, and goeth out to Remmonmethoar to
Neah; 19:14 And the border compasseth it on the north side to
Hannathon: and the outgoings thereof are in the valley of Jiphthahel:
19:15 And Kattath, and Nahallal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and
Bethlehem: twelve cities with their villages. 19:16 This is the inheritance of the children of Zebulun according to
their families, these cities with their villages. 19:17 And the fourth lot came out to Issachar, for the children of
Issachar according to their families. 19:18 And their border was toward Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
19:19 And Haphraim, and Shihon, and Anaharath, 19:20 And Rabbith, and
Kishion, and Abez, 19:21 And Remeth, and Engannim, and Enhaddah, and
Bethpazzez; 19:22 And the coast reacheth to Tabor, and Shahazimah, and
Bethshemesh; and the outgoings of their border were at Jordan: sixteen
cities with their villages. 19:23 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Issachar
according to their families, the cities and their villages. 19:24 And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the children of
Asher according to their families. 19:25 And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
19:26 And Alammelech, and Amad, and Misheal; and reacheth to Carmel
westward, and to Shihorlibnath; 19:27 And turneth toward the sunrising
to Bethdagon, and reacheth to Zebulun, and to the valley of Jiphthahel
toward the north side of Bethemek, and Neiel, and goeth out to Cabul
on the left hand, 19:28 And Hebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah,
even unto great Zidon; 19:29 And then the coast turneth to Ramah, and
to the strong city Tyre; and the coast turneth to Hosah; and the
outgoings thereof are at the sea from the coast to Achzib: 19:30 Ummah
also, and Aphek, and Rehob: twenty and two cities with their villages. 19:31 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Asher
according to their families, these cities with their villages. 19:32 The sixth lot came out to the children of Naphtali, even for the
children of Naphtali according to their families. 19:33 And their coast was from Heleph, from Allon to Zaanannim, and
Adami, Nekeb, and Jabneel, unto Lakum; and the outgoings thereof were
at Jordan: 19:34 And then the coast turneth westward to Aznothtabor,
and goeth out from thence to Hukkok, and reacheth to Zebulun on the
south side, and reacheth to Asher on the west side, and to Judah upon
Jordan toward the sunrising. 19:35 And the fenced cities are Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and
Chinnereth, 19:36 And Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor, 19:37 And Kedesh,
and Edrei, and Enhazor, 19:38 And Iron, and Migdalel, Horem, and
Bethanath, and Bethshemesh; nineteen cities with their villages. 19:39 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Naphtali
according to their families, the cities and their villages. 19:40 And the seventh lot came out for the tribe of the children of
Dan according to their families. 19:41 And the coast of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and
Irshemesh, 19:42 And Shaalabbin, and Ajalon, and Jethlah, 19:43 And
Elon, and Thimnathah, and Ekron, 19:44 And Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and
Baalath, 19:45 And Jehud, and Beneberak, and Gathrimmon, 19:46 And
Mejarkon, and Rakkon, with the border before Japho. 19:47 And the coast of the children of Dan went out too little for
them: therefore the children of Dan went up to fight against Leshem,
and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed
it, and dwelt therein, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan
their father. 19:48 This is the inheritance of the tribe of the children of Dan
according to their families, these cities with their villages. 19:49 When they had made an end of dividing the land for inheritance
by their coasts, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua
the son of Nun among them: 19:50 According to the word of the LORD
they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnathserah in mount
Ephraim: and he built the city, and dwelt therein. 19:51 These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua
the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel, divided for an inheritance by lot in Shiloh before
the LORD, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation. So they
made an end of dividing the country. 20:1 The LORD also spake unto Joshua, saying, 20:2 Speak to the
children of Israel, saying, Appoint out for you cities of refuge,
whereof I spake unto you by the hand of Moses: 20:3 That the slayer
that killeth any person unawares and unwittingly may flee thither: and
they shall be your refuge from the avenger of blood. 20:4 And when he that doth flee unto one of those cities shall stand
at the entering of the gate of the city, and shall declare his cause
in the ears of the elders of that city, they shall take him into the
city unto them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them. 20:5 And if the avenger of blood pursue after him, then they shall not
deliver the slayer up into his hand; because he smote his neighbour
unwittingly, and hated him not beforetime. 20:6 And he shall dwell in that city, until he stand before the
congregation for judgment, and until the death of the high priest that
shall be in those days: then shall the slayer return, and come unto
his own city, and unto his own house, unto the city from whence he
fled. 20:7 And they appointed Kedesh in Galilee in mount Naphtali, and
Shechem in mount Ephraim, and Kirjatharba, which is Hebron, in the
mountain of Judah. 20:8 And on the other side Jordan by Jericho eastward, they assigned
Bezer in the wilderness upon the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and
Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of
the tribe of Manasseh. 20:9 These were the cities appointed for all the children of Israel,
and for the stranger that sojourneth among them, that whosoever
killeth any person at unawares might flee thither, and not die by the
hand of the avenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation. 21:1 Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites unto
Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun, and unto the heads
of the fathers of the tribes of the children of Israel; 21:2 And they
spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, The LORD
commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the
suburbs thereof for our cattle. 21:3 And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their
inheritance, at the commandment of the LORD, these cities and their
suburbs. 21:4 And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites: and the
children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites, had by lot
out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon, and out of
the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities. 21:5 And the rest of the children of Kohath had by lot out of the
families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out
of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities. 21:6 And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the
tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe
of Naphtali, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen
cities. 21:7 The children of Merari by their families had out of the tribe of
Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun,
twelve cities. 21:8 And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these
cities with their suburbs, as the LORD commanded by the hand of Moses. 21:9 And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out
of the tribe of the children of Simeon, these cities which are here
mentioned by name. 21:10 Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the
Kohathites, who were of the children of Levi, had: for theirs was the
first lot. 21:11 And they gave them the city of Arba the father of Anak, which
city is Hebron, in the hill country of Judah, with the suburbs thereof
round about it. 21:12 But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof, gave they
to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession. 21:13 Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest Hebron with
her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Libnah with
her suburbs, 21:14 And Jattir with her suburbs, and Eshtemoa with her
suburbs, 21:15 And Holon with her suburbs, and Debir with her suburbs,
21:16 And Ain with her suburbs, and Juttah with her suburbs, and
Bethshemesh with her suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes. 21:17 And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs, Geba
with her suburbs, 21:18 Anathoth with her suburbs, and Almon with her
suburbs; four cities. 21:19 All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests, were
thirteen cities with their suburbs. 21:20 And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites which
remained of the children of Kohath, even they had the cities of their
lot out of the tribe of Ephraim. 21:21 For they gave them Shechem with her suburbs in mount Ephraim, to
be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Gezer with her suburbs, 21:22
And Kibzaim with her suburbs, and Bethhoron with her suburbs; four
cities. 21:23 And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs, Gibbethon
with her suburbs, 21:24 Aijalon with her suburbs, Gathrimmon with her
suburbs; four cities. 21:25 And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Tanach with her suburbs,
and Gathrimmon with her suburbs; two cities. 21:26 All the cities were ten with their suburbs for the families of
the children of Kohath that remained. 21:27 And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the
Levites, out of the other half tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in
Bashan with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and
Beeshterah with her suburbs; two cities. 21:28 And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs,
Dabareh with her suburbs, 21:29 Jarmuth with her suburbs, Engannim
with her suburbs; four cities. 21:30 And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs, Abdon
with her suburbs, 21:31 Helkath with her suburbs, and Rehob with her
suburbs; four cities. 21:32 And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her
suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Hammothdor with
her suburbs, and Kartan with her suburbs; three cities. 21:33 All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families
were thirteen cities with their suburbs. 21:34 And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the
Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs, and
Kartah with her suburbs, 21:35 Dimnah with her suburbs, Nahalal with
her suburbs; four cities. 21:36 And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs, and
Jahazah with her suburbs, 21:37 Kedemoth with her suburbs, and
Mephaath with her suburbs; four cities. 21:38 And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs,
to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and Mahanaim with her suburbs,
21:39 Heshbon with her suburbs, Jazer with her suburbs; four cities in
all. 21:40 So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families,
which were remaining of the families of the Levites, were by their lot
twelve cities. 21:41 All the cities of the Levites within the possession of the
children of Israel were forty and eight cities with their suburbs. 21:42 These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them:
thus were all these cities. 21:43 And the LORD gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to
give unto their fathers; and they possessed it, and dwelt therein. 21:44 And the LORD gave them rest round about, according to all that
he sware unto their fathers: and there stood not a man of all their
enemies before them; the LORD delivered all their enemies into their
hand. 21:45 There failed not ought of any good thing which the LORD had
spoken unto the house of Israel; all came to pass. 22:1 Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half
tribe of Manasseh, 22:2 And said unto them, Ye have kept all that
Moses the servant of the LORD commanded you, and have obeyed my voice
in all that I commanded you: 22:3 Ye have not left your brethren these
many days unto this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment
of the LORD your God. 22:4 And now the LORD your God hath given rest unto your brethren, as
he promised them: therefore now return ye, and get you unto your
tents, and unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant
of the LORD gave you on the other side Jordan. 22:5 But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law, which
Moses the servant of the LORD charged you, to love the LORD your God,
and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to
cleave unto him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all
your soul. 22:6 So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away: and they went unto
their tents. 22:7 Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given
possession in Bashan: but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua
among their brethren on this side Jordan westward. And when Joshua
sent them away also unto their tents, then he blessed them, 22:8 And
he spake unto them, saying, Return with much riches unto your tents,
and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass,
and with iron, and with very much raiment: divide the spoil of your
enemies with your brethren. 22:9 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the children of Israel
out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go unto the country
of Gilead, to the land of their possession, whereof they were
possessed, according to the word of the LORD by the hand of Moses. 22:10 And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the
land of Canaan, the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the
half tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by Jordan, a great altar
to see to. 22:11 And the children of Israel heard say, Behold, the children of
Reuben and the children of Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh have
built an altar over against the land of Canaan, in the borders of
Jordan, at the passage of the children of Israel. 22:12 And when the children of Israel heard of it, the whole
congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves together at
Shiloh, to go up to war against them. 22:13 And the children of Israel sent unto the children of Reuben, and
to the children of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, into the
land of Gilead, Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, 22:14 And with
him ten princes, of each chief house a prince throughout all the
tribes of Israel; and each one was an head of the house of their
fathers among the thousands of Israel. 22:15 And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children
of Gad, and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead,
and they spake with them, saying, 22:16 Thus saith the whole
congregation of the LORD, What trespass is this that ye have committed
against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following the
LORD, in that ye have builded you an altar, that ye might rebel this
day against the LORD? 22:17 Is the iniquity of Peor too little for
us, from which we are not cleansed until this day, although there was
a plague in the congregation of the LORD, 22:18 But that ye must turn
away this day from following the LORD? and it will be, seeing ye rebel
to day against the LORD, that to morrow he will be wroth with the
whole congregation of Israel. 22:19 Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean, then
pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the LORD, wherein the
LORD's tabernacle dwelleth, and take possession among us: but rebel
not against the LORD, nor rebel against us, in building you an altar
beside the altar of the LORD our God. 22:20 Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in the accursed
thing, and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and that man
perished not alone in his iniquity. 22:21 Then the children of Reuben and the children of Gad and the half
tribe of Manasseh answered, and said unto the heads of the thousands
of Israel, 22:22 The LORD God of gods, the LORD God of gods, he
knoweth, and Israel he shall know; if it be in rebellion, or if in
transgression against the LORD, (save us not this day,) 22:23 That we
have built us an altar to turn from following the LORD, or if to offer
thereon burnt offering or meat offering, or if to offer peace
offerings thereon, let the LORD himself require it; 22:24 And if we
have not rather done it for fear of this thing, saying, In time to
come your children might speak unto our children, saying, What have ye
to do with the LORD God of Israel? 22:25 For the LORD hath made
Jordan a border between us and you, ye children of Reuben and children
of Gad; ye have no part in the LORD: so shall your children make our
children cease from fearing the LORD. 22:26 Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not
for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice: 22:27 But that it may be a
witness between us, and you, and our generations after us, that we
might do the service of the LORD before him with our burnt offerings,
and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings; that your
children may not say to our children in time to come, Ye have no part
in the LORD. 22:28 Therefore said we, that it shall be, when they should so say to
us or to our generations in time to come, that we may say again,
Behold the pattern of the altar of the LORD, which our fathers made,
not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; but it is a witness
between us and you. 22:29 God forbid that we should rebel against the LORD, and turn this
day from following the LORD, to build an altar for burnt offerings,
for meat offerings, or for sacrifices, beside the altar of the LORD
our God that is before his tabernacle. 22:30 And when Phinehas the priest, and the princes of the
congregation and heads of the thousands of Israel which were with him,
heard the words that the children of Reuben and the children of Gad
and the children of Manasseh spake, it pleased them. 22:31 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said unto the
children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the children of
Manasseh, This day we perceive that the LORD is among us, because ye
have not committed this trespass against the LORD: now ye have
delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the LORD. 22:32 And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes,
returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad,
out of the land of Gilead, unto the land of Canaan, to the children of
Israel, and brought them word again. 22:33 And the thing pleased the children of Israel; and the children
of Israel blessed God, and did not intend to go up against them in
battle, to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad
dwelt. 22:34 And the children of Reuben and the children of Gad called the
altar Ed: for it shall be a witness between us that the LORD is God. 23:1 And it came to pass a long time after that the LORD had given
rest unto Israel from all their enemies round about, that Joshua waxed
old and stricken in age. 23:2 And Joshua called for all Israel, and for their elders, and for
their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said
unto them, I am old and stricken in age: 23:3 And ye have seen all
that the LORD your God hath done unto all these nations because of
you; for the LORD your God is he that hath fought for you. 23:4 Behold, I have divided unto you by lot these nations that remain,
to be an inheritance for your tribes, from Jordan, with all the
nations that I have cut off, even unto the great sea westward. 23:5 And the LORD your God, he shall expel them from before you, and
drive them from out of your sight; and ye shall possess their land, as
the LORD your God hath promised unto you. 23:6 Be ye therefore very courageous to keep and to do all that is
written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye turn not aside
therefrom to the right hand or to the left; 23:7 That ye come not
among these nations, these that remain among you; neither make mention
of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve
them, nor bow yourselves unto them: 23:8 But cleave unto the LORD your
God, as ye have done unto this day. 23:9 For the LORD hath driven out from before you great nations and
strong: but as for you, no man hath been able to stand before you unto
this day. 23:10 One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the LORD your God, he
it is that fighteth for you, as he hath promised you. 23:11 Take good heed therefore unto yourselves, that ye love the LORD
your God. 23:12 Else if ye do in any wise go back, and cleave unto the remnant
of these nations, even these that remain among you, and shall make
marriages with them, and go in unto them, and they to you: 23:13 Know
for a certainty that the LORD your God will no more drive out any of
these nations from before you; but they shall be snares and traps unto
you, and scourges in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye
perish from off this good land which the LORD your God hath given you. 23:14 And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth: and
ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing
hath failed of all the good things which the LORD your God spake
concerning you; all are come to pass unto you, and not one thing hath
failed thereof. 23:15 Therefore it shall come to pass, that as all good things are
come upon you, which the LORD your God promised you; so shall the LORD
bring upon you all evil things, until he have destroyed you from off
this good land which the LORD your God hath given you. 23:16 When ye have transgressed the covenant of the LORD your God,
which he commanded you, and have gone and served other gods, and bowed
yourselves to them; then shall the anger of the LORD be kindled
against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which
he hath given unto you. 24:1 And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and
called for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their
judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before
God. 24:2 And Joshua said unto all the people, Thus saith the LORD God of
Israel, Your fathers dwelt on the other side of the flood in old time,
even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor: and they
served other gods. 24:3 And I took your father Abraham from the other side of the flood,
and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his
seed, and gave him Isaac. 24:4 And I gave unto Isaac Jacob and Esau: and I gave unto Esau mount
Seir, to possess it; but Jacob and his children went down into Egypt. 24:5 I sent Moses also and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to
that which I did among them: and afterward I brought you out. 24:6 And I brought your fathers out of Egypt: and ye came unto the
sea; and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and
horsemen unto the Red sea. 24:7 And when they cried unto the LORD, he put darkness between you
and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them;
and your eyes have seen what I have done in Egypt: and ye dwelt in the
wilderness a long season. 24:8 And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, which dwelt on
the other side Jordan; and they fought with you: and I gave them into
your hand, that ye might possess their land; and I destroyed them from
before you. 24:9 Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred
against Israel, and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse
you: 24:10 But I would not hearken unto Balaam; therefore he blessed
you still: so I delivered you out of his hand. 24:11 And you went over Jordan, and came unto Jericho: and the men of
Jericho fought against you, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the
Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Girgashites, the Hivites, and
the Jebusites; and I delivered them into your hand. 24:12 And I sent the hornet before you, which drave them out from
before you, even the two kings of the Amorites; but not with thy
sword, nor with thy bow. 24:13 And I have given you a land for which ye did not labour, and
cities which ye built not, and ye dwell in them; of the vineyards and
oliveyards which ye planted not do ye eat. 24:14 Now therefore fear the LORD, and serve him in sincerity and in
truth: and put away the gods which your fathers served on the other
side of the flood, and in Egypt; and serve ye the LORD. 24:15 And if it seem evil unto you to serve the LORD, choose you this
day whom ye will serve; whether the gods which your fathers served
that were on the other side of the flood, or the gods of the Amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but as for me and my house, we will serve the
LORD. 24:16 And the people answered and said, God forbid that we should
forsake the LORD, to serve other gods; 24:17 For the LORD our God, he
it is that brought us up and our fathers out of the land of Egypt,
from the house of bondage, and which did those great signs in our
sight, and preserved us in all the way wherein we went, and among all
the people through whom we passed: 24:18 And the LORD drave out from
before us all the people, even the Amorites which dwelt in the land:
therefore will we also serve the LORD; for he is our God. 24:19 And Joshua said unto the people, Ye cannot serve the LORD: for
he is an holy God; he is a jealous God; he will not forgive your
transgressions nor your sins. 24:20 If ye forsake the LORD, and serve strange gods, then he will
turn and do you hurt, and consume you, after that he hath done you
good. 24:21 And the people said unto Joshua, Nay; but we will serve the
LORD. 24:22 And Joshua said unto the people, Ye are witnesses against
yourselves that ye have chosen you the LORD, to serve him. And they
said, We are witnesses. 24:23 Now therefore put away, said he, the strange gods which are
among you, and incline your heart unto the LORD God of Israel. 24:24 And the people said unto Joshua, The LORD our God will we serve,
and his voice will we obey. 24:25 So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them
a statute and an ordinance in Shechem. 24:26 And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God, and
took a great stone, and set it up there under an oak, that was by the
sanctuary of the LORD. 24:27 And Joshua said unto all the people, Behold, this stone shall be
a witness unto us; for it hath heard all the words of the LORD which
he spake unto us: it shall be therefore a witness unto you, lest ye
deny your God. 24:28 So Joshua let the people depart, every man unto his inheritance. 24:29 And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of
Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an hundred and ten years
old. 24:30 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathserah, which is in mount Ephraim, on the north side of the hill
of Gaash. 24:31 And Israel served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the
days of the elders that overlived Joshua, and which had known all the
works of the LORD, that he had done for Israel. 24:32 And the bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought up
out of Egypt, buried they in Shechem, in a parcel of ground which
Jacob bought of the sons of Hamor the father of Shechem for an hundred
pieces of silver: and it became the inheritance of the children of
Joseph. 24:33 And Eleazar the son of Aaron died; and they buried him in a hill
that pertained to Phinehas his son, which was given him in mount
Ephraim. The Book of Judges


1:1 Now after the death of Joshua it came to pass, that the children
of Israel asked the LORD, saying, Who shall go up for us against the
Canaanites first, to fight against them? 1:2 And the LORD said, Judah
shall go up: behold, I have delivered the land into his hand. 1:3 And Judah said unto Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my
lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites; and I likewise will go
with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him. 1:4 And Judah went up; and the LORD delivered the Canaanites and the
Perizzites into their hand: and they slew of them in Bezek ten
thousand men. 1:5 And they found Adonibezek in Bezek: and they fought against him,
and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites. 1:6 But Adonibezek fled; and they pursued after him, and caught him,
and cut off his thumbs and his great toes. 1:7 And Adonibezek said, Threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs
and their great toes cut off, gathered their meat under my table: as I
have done, so God hath requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem,
and there he died. 1:8 Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had
taken it, and smitten it with the edge of the sword, and set the city
on fire. 1:9 And afterward the children of Judah went down to fight against the
Canaanites, that dwelt in the mountain, and in the south, and in the
valley. 1:10 And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron: (now
the name of Hebron before was Kirjatharba:) and they slew Sheshai, and
Ahiman, and Talmai. 1:11 And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the
name of Debir before was Kirjathsepher: 1:12 And Caleb said, He that
smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it, to him will I give Achsah my
daughter to wife. 1:13 And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it:
and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife. 1:14 And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to
ask of her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass; and Caleb
said unto her, What wilt thou? 1:15 And she said unto him, Give me a
blessing: for thou hast given me a south land; give me also springs of
water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs. 1:16 And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father in law, went up out
of the city of palm trees with the children of Judah into the
wilderness of Judah, which lieth in the south of Arad; and they went
and dwelt among the people. 1:17 And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they slew the
Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the
name of the city was called Hormah. 1:18 Also Judah took Gaza with the coast thereof, and Askelon with the
coast thereof, and Ekron with the coast thereof. 1:19 And the LORD was with Judah; and he drave out the inhabitants of
the mountain; but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley,
because they had chariots of iron. 1:20 And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said: and he expelled
thence the three sons of Anak. 1:21 And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that
inhabited Jerusalem; but the Jebusites dwell with the children of
Benjamin in Jerusalem unto this day. 1:22 And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel: and
the LORD was with them. 1:23 And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel. (Now the name of
the city before was Luz.) 1:24 And the spies saw a man come forth out
of the city, and they said unto him, Shew us, we pray thee, the
entrance into the city, and we will shew thee mercy. 1:25 And when he shewed them the entrance into the city, they smote
the city with the edge of the sword; but they let go the man and all
his family. 1:26 And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city,
and called the name thereof Luz: which is the name thereof unto this
day. 1:27 Neither did Manasseh drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and
her towns, nor Taanach and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and
her towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and her towns, nor the
inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns: but the Canaanites would dwell
in that land. 1:28 And it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that they put the
Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out. 1:29 Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer;
but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them. 1:30 Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the
inhabitants of Nahalol; but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and
became tributaries. 1:31 Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho, nor the
inhabitants of Zidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor
of Aphik, nor of Rehob: 1:32 But the Asherites dwelt among the
Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land: for they did not drive them
out. 1:33 Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh,
nor the inhabitants of Bethanath; but he dwelt among the Canaanites,
the inhabitants of the land: nevertheless the inhabitants of
Bethshemesh and of Bethanath became tributaries unto them. 1:34 And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain:
for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley: 1:35 But
the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim:
yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became
tributaries. 1:36 And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim,
from the rock, and upward. 2:1 And an angel of the LORD came up from Gilgal to Bochim, and said,
I made you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you unto the land
which I sware unto your fathers; and I said, I will never break my
covenant with you. 2:2 And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land; ye
shall throw down their altars: but ye have not obeyed my voice: why
have ye done this? 2:3 Wherefore I also said, I will not drive them
out from before you; but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and
their gods shall be a snare unto you. 2:4 And it came to pass, when the angel of the LORD spake these words
unto all the children of Israel, that the people lifted up their
voice, and wept. 2:5 And they called the name of that place Bochim: and they sacrificed
there unto the LORD. 2:6 And when Joshua had let the people go, the children of Israel went
every man unto his inheritance to possess the land. 2:7 And the people served the LORD all the days of Joshua, and all the
days of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great
works of the LORD, that he did for Israel. 2:8 And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of the LORD, died, being an
hundred and ten years old. 2:9 And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in
Timnathheres, in the mount of Ephraim, on the north side of the hill
Gaash. 2:10 And also all that generation were gathered unto their fathers:
and there arose another generation after them, which knew not the
LORD, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel. 2:11 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and
served Baalim: 2:12 And they forsook the LORD God of their fathers,
which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods,
of the gods of the people that were round about them, and bowed
themselves unto them, and provoked the LORD to anger. 2:13 And they forsook the LORD, and served Baal and Ashtaroth. 2:14 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he
delivered them into the hands of spoilers that spoiled them, and he
sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they
could not any longer stand before their enemies. 2:15 Whithersoever they went out, the hand of the LORD was against
them for evil, as the LORD had said, and as the LORD had sworn unto
them: and they were greatly distressed. 2:16 Nevertheless the LORD raised up judges, which delivered them out
of the hand of those that spoiled them. 2:17 And yet they would not hearken unto their judges, but they went a
whoring after other gods, and bowed themselves unto them: they turned
quickly out of the way which their fathers walked in, obeying the
commandments of the LORD; but they did not so. 2:18 And when the LORD raised them up judges, then the LORD was with
the judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their enemies all the
days of the judge: for it repented the LORD because of their groanings
by reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them. 2:19 And it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they returned,
and corrupted themselves more than their fathers, in following other
gods to serve them, and to bow down unto them; they ceased not from
their own doings, nor from their stubborn way. 2:20 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel; and he said,
Because that this people hath transgressed my covenant which I
commanded their fathers, and have not hearkened unto my voice; 2:21 I
also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations
which Joshua left when he died: 2:22 That through them I may prove
Israel, whether they will keep the way of the LORD to walk therein, as
their fathers did keep it, or not. 2:23 Therefore the LORD left those nations, without driving them out
hastily; neither delivered he them into the hand of Joshua. 3:1 Now these are the nations which the LORD left, to prove Israel by
them, even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan;
3:2 Only that the generations of the children of Israel might know, to
teach them war, at the least such as before knew nothing thereof; 3:3
Namely, five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the
Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount
Baalhermon unto the entering in of Hamath. 3:4 And they were to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would
hearken unto the commandments of the LORD, which he commanded their
fathers by the hand of Moses. 3:5 And the children of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, Hittites,
and Amorites, and Perizzites, and Hivites, and Jebusites: 3:6 And they
took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their daughters to
their sons, and served their gods. 3:7 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD, and
forgat the LORD their God, and served Baalim and the groves. 3:8 Therefore the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he
sold them into the hand of Chushanrishathaim king of Mesopotamia: and
the children of Israel served Chushanrishathaim eight years. 3:9 And when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD
raised up a deliverer to the children of Israel, who delivered them,
even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother. 3:10 And the Spirit of the LORD came upon him, and he judged Israel,
and went out to war: and the LORD delivered Chushanrishathaim king of
Mesopotamia into his hand; and his hand prevailed against
Chushanrishathaim. 3:11 And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz
died. 3:12 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
LORD: and the LORD strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel,
because they had done evil in the sight of the LORD. 3:13 And he gathered unto him the children of Ammon and Amalek, and
went and smote Israel, and possessed the city of palm trees. 3:14 So the children of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen
years. 3:15 But when the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, the LORD
raised them up a deliverer, Ehud the son of Gera, a Benjamite, a man
lefthanded: and by him the children of Israel sent a present unto
Eglon the king of Moab. 3:16 But Ehud made him a dagger which had two edges, of a cubit
length; and he did gird it under his raiment upon his right thigh. 3:17 And he brought the present unto Eglon king of Moab: and Eglon was
a very fat man. 3:18 And when he had made an end to offer the present, he sent away
the people that bare the present. 3:19 But he himself turned again from the quarries that were by
Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand unto thee, O king: who said,
Keep silence. And all that stood by him went out from him. 3:20 And Ehud came unto him; and he was sitting in a summer parlour,
which he had for himself alone. And Ehud said, I have a message from
God unto thee. And he arose out of his seat. 3:21 And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his
right thigh, and thrust it into his belly: 3:22 And the haft also went
in after the blade; and the fat closed upon the blade, so that he
could not draw the dagger out of his belly; and the dirt came out. 3:23 Then Ehud went forth through the porch, and shut the doors of the
parlour upon him, and locked them. 3:24 When he was gone out, his servants came; and when they saw that,
behold, the doors of the parlour were locked, they said, Surely he
covereth his feet in his summer chamber. 3:25 And they tarried till they were ashamed: and, behold, he opened
not the doors of the parlour; therefore they took a key, and opened
them: and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth. 3:26 And Ehud escaped while they tarried, and passed beyond the
quarries, and escaped unto Seirath. 3:27 And it came to pass, when he was come, that he blew a trumpet in
the mountain of Ephraim, and the children of Israel went down with him
from the mount, and he before them. 3:28 And he said unto them, Follow after me: for the LORD hath
delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down
after him, and took the fords of Jordan toward Moab, and suffered not
a man to pass over. 3:29 And they slew of Moab at that time about ten thousand men, all
lusty, and all men of valour; and there escaped not a man. 3:30 So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the
land had rest fourscore years. 3:31 And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, which slew of the
Philistines six hundred men with an ox goad: and he also delivered
Israel. 4:1 And the children of Israel again did evil in the sight of the
LORD, when Ehud was dead. 4:2 And the LORD sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan, that
reigned in Hazor; the captain of whose host was Sisera, which dwelt in
Harosheth of the Gentiles. 4:3 And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD: for he had nine
hundred chariots of iron; and twenty years he mightily oppressed the
children of Israel. 4:4 And Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth, she judged Israel
at that time. 4:5 And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and
Bethel in mount Ephraim: and the children of Israel came up to her for
judgment. 4:6 And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of
Kedeshnaphtali, and said unto him, Hath not the LORD God of Israel
commanded, saying, Go and draw toward mount Tabor, and take with thee
ten thousand men of the children of Naphtali and of the children of
Zebulun? 4:7 And I will draw unto thee to the river Kishon Sisera,
the captain of Jabin's army, with his chariots and his multitude; and
I will deliver him into thine hand. 4:8 And Barak said unto her, If thou wilt go with me, then I will go:
but if thou wilt not go with me, then I will not go. 4:9 And she said, I will surely go with thee: notwithstanding the
journey that thou takest shall not be for thine honour; for the LORD
shall sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and
went with Barak to Kedesh. 4:10 And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali to Kedesh; and he went up
with ten thousand men at his feet: and Deborah went up with him. 4:11 Now Heber the Kenite, which was of the children of Hobab the
father in law of Moses, had severed himself from the Kenites, and
pitched his tent unto the plain of Zaanaim, which is by Kedesh. 4:12 And they shewed Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up
to mount Tabor. 4:13 And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred
chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from
Harosheth of the Gentiles unto the river of Kishon. 4:14 And Deborah said unto Barak, Up; for this is the day in which the
LORD hath delivered Sisera into thine hand: is not the LORD gone out
before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men
after him. 4:15 And the LORD discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all
his host, with the edge of the sword before Barak; so that Sisera
lighted down off his chariot, and fled away on his feet. 4:16 But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the host, unto
Harosheth of the Gentiles: and all the host of Sisera fell upon the
edge of the sword; and there was not a man left. 4:17 Howbeit Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife
of Heber the Kenite: for there was peace between Jabin the king of
Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite. 4:18 And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said unto him, Turn in, my
lord, turn in to me; fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into
the tent, she covered him with a mantle. 4:19 And he said unto her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to
drink; for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him
drink, and covered him. 4:20 Again he said unto her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it
shall be, when any man doth come and enquire of thee, and say, Is
there any man here? that thou shalt say, No. 4:21 Then Jael Heber's wife took a nail of the tent, and took an
hammer in her hand, and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into
his temples, and fastened it into the ground: for he was fast asleep
and weary. So he died. 4:22 And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him,
and said unto him, Come, and I will shew thee the man whom thou
seekest. And when he came into her tent, behold, Sisera lay dead, and
the nail was in his temples. 4:23 So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the
children of Israel. 4:24 And the hand of the children of Israel prospered, and prevailed
against Jabin the king of Canaan, until they had destroyed Jabin king
of Canaan. 5:1 Then sang Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam on that day,
saying, 5:2 Praise ye the LORD for the avenging of Israel, when the
people willingly offered themselves. 5:3 Hear, O ye kings; give ear, O ye princes; I, even I, will sing
unto the LORD; I will sing praise to the LORD God of Israel. 5:4 LORD, when thou wentest out of Seir, when thou marchedst out of
the field of Edom, the earth trembled, and the heavens dropped, the
clouds also dropped water. 5:5 The mountains melted from before the LORD, even that Sinai from
before the LORD God of Israel. 5:6 In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the
highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways. 5:7 The inhabitants of the villages ceased, they ceased in Israel,
until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel. 5:8 They chose new gods; then was war in the gates: was there a shield
or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel? 5:9 My heart is toward
the governors of Israel, that offered themselves willingly among the
people. Bless ye the LORD. 5:10 Speak, ye that ride on white asses, ye that sit in judgment, and
walk by the way. 5:11 They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the places
of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous acts of the
LORD, even the righteous acts toward the inhabitants of his villages
in Israel: then shall the people of the LORD go down to the gates. 5:12 Awake, awake, Deborah: awake, awake, utter a song: arise, Barak,
and lead thy captivity captive, thou son of Abinoam. 5:13 Then he made him that remaineth have dominion over the nobles
among the people: the LORD made me have dominion over the mighty. 5:14 Out of Ephraim was there a root of them against Amalek; after
thee, Benjamin, among thy people; out of Machir came down governors,
and out of Zebulun they that handle the pen of the writer. 5:15 And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah; even Issachar, and
also Barak: he was sent on foot into the valley. For the divisions of
Reuben there were great thoughts of heart. 5:16 Why abodest thou among the sheepfolds, to hear the bleatings of
the flocks? For the divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of
heart. 5:17 Gilead abode beyond Jordan: and why did Dan remain in ships? Asher continued on the sea shore, and abode in his breaches. 5:18 Zebulun and Naphtali were a people that jeoparded their lives
unto the death in the high places of the field. 5:19 The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in
Taanach by the waters of Megiddo; they took no gain of money. 5:20 They fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought
against Sisera. 5:21 The river of Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the
river Kishon. O my soul, thou hast trodden down strength. 5:22 Then were the horsehoofs broken by the means of the pransings,
the pransings of their mighty ones. 5:23 Curse ye Meroz, said the angel of the LORD, curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof; because they came not to the help of the LORD, to
the help of the LORD against the mighty. 5:24 Blessed above women shall Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite be,
blessed shall she be above women in the tent. 5:25 He asked water, and she gave him milk; she brought forth butter
in a lordly dish. 5:26 She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the workmen's
hammer; and with the hammer she smote Sisera, she smote off his head,
when she had pierced and stricken through his temples. 5:27 At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay down: at her feet he bowed,
he fell: where he bowed, there he fell down dead. 5:28 The mother of Sisera looked out at a window, and cried through
the lattice, Why is his chariot so long in coming? why tarry the
wheels of his chariots? 5:29 Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she
returned answer to herself, 5:30 Have they not sped? have they not
divided the prey; to every man a damsel or two; to Sisera a prey of
divers colours, a prey of divers colours of needlework, of divers
colours of needlework on both sides, meet for the necks of them that
take the spoil? 5:31 So let all thine enemies perish, O LORD: but let
them that love him be as the sun when he goeth forth in his might. And
the land had rest forty years. 6:1 And the children of Israel did evil in the sight of the LORD: and
the LORD delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years. 6:2 And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel: and because of
the Midianites the children of Israel made them the dens which are in
the mountains, and caves, and strong holds. 6:3 And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up,
and the Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up
against them; 6:4 And they encamped against them, and destroyed the
increase of the earth, till thou come unto Gaza, and left no
sustenance for Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor ass. 6:5 For they came up with their cattle and their tents, and they came
as grasshoppers for multitude; for both they and their camels were
without number: and they entered into the land to destroy it. 6:6 And Israel was greatly impoverished because of the Midianites; and
the children of Israel cried unto the LORD. 6:7 And it came to pass, when the children of Israel cried unto the
LORD because of the Midianites, 6:8 That the LORD sent a prophet unto
the children of Israel, which said unto them, Thus saith the LORD God
of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of
the house of bondage; 6:9 And I delivered you out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drave
them out from before you, and gave you their land; 6:10 And I said
unto you, I am the LORD your God; fear not the gods of the Amorites,
in whose land ye dwell: but ye have not obeyed my voice. 6:11 And there came an angel of the LORD, and sat under an oak which
was in Ophrah, that pertained unto Joash the Abiezrite: and his son
Gideon threshed wheat by the winepress, to hide it from the
Midianites. 6:12 And the angel of the LORD appeared unto him, and said unto him,
The LORD is with thee, thou mighty man of valour. 6:13 And Gideon said unto him, Oh my Lord, if the LORD be with us, why
then is all this befallen us? and where be all his miracles which our
fathers told us of, saying, Did not the LORD bring us up from Egypt? but now the LORD hath forsaken us, and delivered us into the hands of
the Midianites. 6:14 And the LORD looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and
thou shalt save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not I
sent thee? 6:15 And he said unto him, Oh my Lord, wherewith shall I
save Israel? behold, my family is poor in Manasseh, and I am the
least in my father's house. 6:16 And the LORD said unto him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou
shalt smite the Midianites as one man. 6:17 And he said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight,
then shew me a sign that thou talkest with me. 6:18 Depart not hence, I pray thee, until I come unto thee, and bring
forth my present, and set it before thee. And he said, I will tarry
until thou come again. 6:19 And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of
an ephah of flour: the flesh he put in a basket, and he put the broth
in a pot, and brought it out unto him under the oak, and presented it. 6:20 And the angel of God said unto him, Take the flesh and the
unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so. 6:21 Then the angel of the LORD put forth the end of the staff that
was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes; and
there rose up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the
unleavened cakes. Then the angel of the LORD departed out of his
sight. 6:22 And when Gideon perceived that he was an angel of the LORD,
Gideon said, Alas, O LORD God! for because I have seen an angel of the
LORD face to face. 6:23 And the LORD said unto him, Peace be unto thee; fear not: thou
shalt not die. 6:24 Then Gideon built an altar there unto the LORD, and called it
Jehovahshalom: unto this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites. 6:25 And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him,
Take thy father's young bullock, even the second bullock of seven
years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father hath, and
cut down the grove that is by it: 6:26 And build an altar unto the
LORD thy God upon the top of this rock, in the ordered place, and take
the second bullock, and offer a burnt sacrifice with the wood of the
grove which thou shalt cut down. 6:27 Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as the LORD had
said unto him: and so it was, because he feared his father's
household, and the men of the city, that he could not do it by day,
that he did it by night. 6:28 And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold,
the altar of Baal was cast down, and the grove was cut down that was
by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was
built. 6:29 And they said one to another, Who hath done this thing? And when
they enquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash hath done
this thing. 6:30 Then the men of the city said unto Joash, Bring out thy son, that
he may die: because he hath cast down the altar of Baal, and because
he hath cut down the grove that was by it. 6:31 And Joash said unto all that stood against him, Will ye plead for
Baal? will ye save him? he that will plead for him, let him be put to
death whilst it is yet morning: if he be a god, let him plead for
himself, because one hath cast down his altar. 6:32 Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal
plead against him, because he hath thrown down his altar. 6:33 Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the children of
the east were gathered together, and went over, and pitched in the
valley of Jezreel. 6:34 But the Spirit of the LORD came upon Gideon, and he blew a
trumpet; and Abiezer was gathered after him. 6:35 And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh; who also was
gathered after him: and he sent messengers unto Asher, and unto
Zebulun, and unto Naphtali; and they came up to meet them. 6:36 And Gideon said unto God, If thou wilt save Israel by mine hand,
as thou hast said, 6:37 Behold, I will put a fleece of wool in the
floor; and if the dew be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all
the earth beside, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by mine
hand, as thou hast said. 6:38 And it was so: for he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the
fleece together, and wringed the dew out of the fleece, a bowl full of
water. 6:39 And Gideon said unto God, Let not thine anger be hot against me,
and I will speak but this once: let me prove, I pray thee, but this
once with the fleece; let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon
all the ground let there be dew. 6:40 And God did so that night: for it was dry upon the fleece only,
and there was dew on all the ground. 7:1 Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people that were with
him, rose up early, and pitched beside the well of Harod: so that the
host of the Midianites were on the north side of them, by the hill of
Moreh, in the valley. 7:2 And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people that are with thee are
too many for me to give the Midianites into their hands, lest Israel
vaunt themselves against me, saying, Mine own hand hath saved me. 7:3 Now therefore go to, proclaim in the ears of the people, saying,
Whosoever is fearful and afraid, let him return and depart early from
mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty and two
thousand; and there remained ten thousand. 7:4 And the LORD said unto Gideon, The people are yet too many; bring
them down unto the water, and I will try them for thee there: and it
shall be, that of whom I say unto thee, This shall go with thee, the
same shall go with thee; and of whomsoever I say unto thee, This shall
not go with thee, the same shall not go. 7:5 So he brought down the people unto the water: and the LORD said
unto Gideon, Every one that lappeth of the water with his tongue, as a
dog lappeth, him shalt thou set by himself; likewise every one that
boweth down upon his knees to drink. 7:6 And the number of them that lapped, putting their hand to their
mouth, were three hundred men: but all the rest of the people bowed
down upon their knees to drink water. 7:7 And the LORD said unto Gideon, By the three hundred men that
lapped will I save you, and deliver the Midianites into thine hand:
and let all the other people go every man unto his place. 7:8 So the people took victuals in their hand, and their trumpets: and
he sent all the rest of Israel every man unto his tent, and retained
those three hundred men: and the host of Midian was beneath him in the
valley. 7:9 And it came to pass the same night, that the LORD said unto him,
Arise, get thee down unto the host; for I have delivered it into thine
hand. 7:10 But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Phurah thy servant down
to the host: 7:11 And thou shalt hear what they say; and afterward
shall thine hands be strengthened to go down unto the host. Then went
he down with Phurah his servant unto the outside of the armed men that
were in the host. 7:12 And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the children of the
east lay along in the valley like grasshoppers for multitude; and
their camels were without number, as the sand by the sea side for
multitude. 7:13 And when Gideon was come, behold, there was a man that told a
dream unto his fellow, and said, Behold, I dreamed a dream, and, lo, a
cake of barley bread tumbled into the host of Midian, and came unto a
tent, and smote it that it fell, and overturned it, that the tent lay
along. 7:14 And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else save the
sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel: for into his hand
hath God delivered Midian, and all the host. 7:15 And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and
the interpretation thereof, that he worshipped, and returned into the
host of Israel, and said, Arise; for the LORD hath delivered into your
hand the host of Midian. 7:16 And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he
put a trumpet in every man's hand, with empty pitchers, and lamps
within the pitchers. 7:17 And he said unto them, Look on me, and do likewise: and, behold,
when I come to the outside of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so
shall ye do. 7:18 When I blow with a trumpet, I and all that are with me, then blow
ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, The sword
of the LORD, and of Gideon. 7:19 So Gideon, and the hundred men that were with him, came unto the
outside of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch; and they had
but newly set the watch: and they blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers that were in their hands. 7:20 And the three companies blew the trumpets, and brake the
pitchers, and held the lamps in their left hands, and the trumpets in
their right hands to blow withal: and they cried, The sword of the
LORD, and of Gideon. 7:21 And they stood every man in his place round about the camp; and
all the host ran, and cried, and fled. 7:22 And the three hundred blew the trumpets, and the LORD set every
man's sword against his fellow, even throughout all the host: and the
host fled to Bethshittah in Zererath, and to the border of
Abelmeholah, unto Tabbath. 7:23 And the men of Israel gathered themselves together out of
Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after
the Midianites. 7:24 And Gideon sent messengers throughout all mount Ephraim, saying,
come down against the Midianites, and take before them the waters unto
Bethbarah and Jordan. Then all the men of Ephraim gathered themselves
together, and took the waters unto Bethbarah and Jordan. 7:25 And they took two princes of the Midianites, Oreb and Zeeb; and
they slew Oreb upon the rock Oreb, and Zeeb they slew at the winepress
of Zeeb, and pursued Midian, and brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to
Gideon on the other side Jordan. 8:1 And the men of Ephraim said unto him, Why hast thou served us
thus, that thou calledst us not, when thou wentest to fight with the
Midianites? And they did chide with him sharply. 8:2 And he said unto them, What have I done now in comparison of you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage
of Abiezer? 8:3 God hath delivered into your hands the princes of
Midian, Oreb and Zeeb: and what was I able to do in comparison of you? Then their anger was abated toward him, when he had said that. 8:4 And Gideon came to Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three
hundred men that were with him, faint, yet pursuing them. 8:5 And he said unto the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of
bread unto the people that follow me; for they be faint, and I am
pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, kings of Midian. 8:6 And the princes of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and
Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thine army? 8:7 And Gideon said, Therefore when the LORD hath delivered Zebah and
Zalmunna into mine hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns
of the wilderness and with briers. 8:8 And he went up thence to Penuel, and spake unto them likewise: and
the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered him. 8:9 And he spake also unto the men of Penuel, saying, When I come
again in peace, I will break down this tower. 8:10 Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their hosts with them,
about fifteen thousand men, all that were left of all the hosts of the
children of the east: for there fell an hundred and twenty thousand
men that drew sword. 8:11 And Gideon went up by the way of them that dwelt in tents on the
east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the host; for the host was
secure. 8:12 And when Zebah and Zalmunna fled, he pursued after them, and took
the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the
host. 8:13 And Gideon the son of Joash returned from battle before the sun
was up, 8:14 And caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and
enquired of him: and he described unto him the princes of Succoth, and
the elders thereof, even threescore and seventeen men. 8:15 And he came unto the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and
Zalmunna, with whom ye did upbraid me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah
and Zalmunna now in thine hand, that we should give bread unto thy men
that are weary? 8:16 And he took the elders of the city, and thorns
of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of
Succoth. 8:17 And he beat down the tower of Penuel, and slew the men of the
city. 8:18 Then said he unto Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were
they whom ye slew at Tabor? And they answered, As thou art, so were
they; each one resembled the children of a king. 8:19 And he said, They were my brethren, even the sons of my mother:
as the LORD liveth, if ye had saved them alive, I would not slay you. 8:20 And he said unto Jether his firstborn, Up, and slay them. But the
youth drew not his sword: for he feared, because he was yet a youth. 8:21 Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as
the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and slew Zebah and
Zalmunna, and took away the ornaments that were on their camels'
necks. 8:22 Then the men of Israel said unto Gideon, Rule thou over us, both
thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also: for thou hast delivered us
from the hand of Midian. 8:23 And Gideon said unto them, I will not rule over you, neither
shall my son rule over you: the LORD shall rule over you. 8:24 And Gideon said unto them, I would desire a request of you, that
ye would give me every man the earrings of his prey. (For they had
golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.) 8:25 And they
answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment, and
did cast therein every man the earrings of his prey. 8:26 And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a
thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold; beside ornaments, and
collars, and purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and
beside the chains that were about their camels' necks. 8:27 And Gideon made an ephod thereof, and put it in his city, even in
Ophrah: and all Israel went thither a whoring after it: which thing
became a snare unto Gideon, and to his house. 8:28 Thus was Midian subdued before the children of Israel, so that
they lifted up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness
forty years in the days of Gideon. 8:29 And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house. 8:30 And Gideon had threescore and ten sons of his body begotten: for
he had many wives. 8:31 And his concubine that was in Shechem, she also bare him a son,
whose name he called Abimelech. 8:32 And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was
buried in the sepulchre of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the
Abiezrites. 8:33 And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the
children of Israel turned again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and
made Baalberith their god. 8:34 And the children of Israel remembered not the LORD their God, who
had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on every
side: 8:35 Neither shewed they kindness to the house of Jerubbaal,
namely, Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto
Israel. 9:1 And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem unto his
mother's brethren, and communed with them, and with all the family of
the house of his mother's father, saying, 9:2 Speak, I pray you, in
the ears of all the men of Shechem, Whether is better for you, either
that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which are threescore and ten persons,
reign over you, or that one reign over you? remember also that I am
your bone and your flesh. 9:3 And his mother's brethren spake of him in the ears of all the men
of Shechem all these words: and their hearts inclined to follow
Abimelech; for they said, He is our brother. 9:4 And they gave him threescore and ten pieces of silver out of the
house of Baalberith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons,
which followed him. 9:5 And he went unto his father's house at Ophrah, and slew his
brethren the sons of Jerubbaal, being threescore and ten persons, upon
one stone: notwithstanding yet Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal
was left; for he hid himself. 9:6 And all the men of Shechem gathered together, and all the house of
Millo, and went, and made Abimelech king, by the plain of the pillar
that was in Shechem. 9:7 And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood in the top of
mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried, and said unto them,
Hearken unto me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken unto you. 9:8 The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and
they said unto the olive tree, Reign thou over us. 9:9 But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness,
wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over
the trees? 9:10 And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and
reign over us. 9:11 But the fig tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness,
and my good fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees? 9:12 Then
said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us. 9:13 And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which
cheereth God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees? 9:14 Then
said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us. 9:15 And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me
king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not,
let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon. 9:16 Now therefore, if ye have done truly and sincerely, in that ye
have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and
his house, and have done unto him according to the deserving of his
hands; 9:17 (For my father fought for you, and adventured his life
far, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian: 9:18 And ye are
risen up against my father's house this day, and have slain his sons,
threescore and ten persons, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech,
the son of his maidservant, king over the men of Shechem, because he
is your brother;) 9:19 If ye then have dealt truly and sincerely with
Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech,
and let him also rejoice in you: 9:20 But if not, let fire come out
from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo;
and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of
Millo, and devour Abimelech. 9:21 And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there,
for fear of Abimelech his brother. 9:22 When Abimelech had reigned three years over Israel, 9:23 Then God
sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem; and the
men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech: 9:24 That the
cruelty done to the threescore and ten sons of Jerubbaal might come,
and their blood be laid upon Abimelech their brother, which slew them;
and upon the men of Shechem, which aided him in the killing of his
brethren. 9:25 And the men of Shechem set liers in wait for him in the top of
the mountains, and they robbed all that came along that way by them:
and it was told Abimelech. 9:26 And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brethren, and went over to
Shechem: and the men of Shechem put their confidence in him. 9:27 And they went out into the fields, and gathered their vineyards,
and trode the grapes, and made merry, and went into the house of their
god, and did eat and drink, and cursed Abimelech. 9:28 And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is
Shechem, that we should serve him? is not he the son of Jerubbaal? and
Zebul his officer? serve the men of Hamor the father of Shechem: for
why should we serve him? 9:29 And would to God this people were under
my hand! then would I remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech,
Increase thine army, and come out. 9:30 And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the
son of Ebed, his anger was kindled. 9:31 And he sent messengers unto Abimelech privily, saying, Behold,
Gaal the son of Ebed and his brethren be come to Shechem; and, behold,
they fortify the city against thee. 9:32 Now therefore up by night, thou and the people that is with thee,
and lie in wait in the field: 9:33 And it shall be, that in the
morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shalt rise early, and set upon
the city: and, behold, when he and the people that is with him come
out against thee, then mayest thou do to them as thou shalt find
occasion. 9:34 And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were with him, by
night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies. 9:35 And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entering of
the gate of the city: and Abimelech rose up, and the people that were
with him, from lying in wait. 9:36 And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there
come people down from the top of the mountains. And Zebul said unto
him, Thou seest the shadow of the mountains as if they were men. 9:37 And Gaal spake again, and said, See there come people down by the
middle of the land, and another company come along by the plain of
Meonenim. 9:38 Then said Zebul unto him, Where is now thy mouth, wherewith thou
saidst, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? is not this the
people that thou hast despised? go out, I pray now, and fight with
them. 9:39 And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with
Abimelech. 9:40 And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and many were
overthrown and wounded, even unto the entering of the gate. 9:41 And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah: and Zebul thrust out Gaal and his
brethren, that they should not dwell in Shechem. 9:42 And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into
the field; and they told Abimelech. 9:43 And he took the people, and divided them into three companies,
and laid wait in the field, and looked, and, behold, the people were
come forth out of the city; and he rose up against them, and smote
them. 9:44 And Abimelech, and the company that was with him, rushed forward,
and stood in the entering of the gate of the city: and the two other
companies ran upon all the people that were in the fields, and slew
them. 9:45 And Abimelech fought against the city all that day; and he took
the city, and slew the people that was therein, and beat down the
city, and sowed it with salt. 9:46 And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard that, they
entered into an hold of the house of the god Berith. 9:47 And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of
Shechem were gathered together. 9:48 And Abimelech gat him up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people
that were with him; and Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut
down a bough from the trees, and took it, and laid it on his shoulder,
and said unto the people that were with him, What ye have seen me do,
make haste, and do as I have done. 9:49 And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and
followed Abimelech, and put them to the hold, and set the hold on fire
upon them; so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also,
about a thousand men and women. 9:50 Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and
took it. 9:51 But there was a strong tower within the city, and thither fled
all the men and women, and all they of the city, and shut it to them,
and gat them up to the top of the tower. 9:52 And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and
went hard unto the door of the tower to burn it with fire. 9:53 And a certain woman cast a piece of a millstone upon Abimelech's
head, and all to brake his skull. 9:54 Then he called hastily unto the young man his armourbearer, and
said unto him, Draw thy sword, and slay me, that men say not of me, A
women slew him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died. 9:55 And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they
departed every man unto his place. 9:56 Thus God rendered the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did unto
his father, in slaying his seventy brethren: 9:57 And all the evil of
the men of Shechem did God render upon their heads: and upon them came
the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal. 10:1 And after Abimelech there arose to defend Israel Tola the son of
Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar; and he dwelt in Shamir in
mount Ephraim. 10:2 And he judged Israel twenty and three years, and died, and was
buried in Shamir. 10:3 And after him arose Jair, a Gileadite, and judged Israel twenty
and two years. 10:4 And he had thirty sons that rode on thirty ass colts, and they
had thirty cities, which are called Havothjair unto this day, which
are in the land of Gilead. 10:5 And Jair died, and was buried in Camon. 10:6 And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the
LORD, and served Baalim, and Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the
gods of Zidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the children of
Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines, and forsook the LORD, and
served not him. 10:7 And the anger of the LORD was hot against Israel, and he sold
them into the hands of the Philistines, and into the hands of the
children of Ammon. 10:8 And that year they vexed and oppressed the children of Israel:
eighteen years, all the children of Israel that were on the other side
Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead. 10:9 Moreover the children of Ammon passed over Jordan to fight also
against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim;
so that Israel was sore distressed. 10:10 And the children of Israel cried unto the LORD, saying, We have
sinned against thee, both because we have forsaken our God, and also
served Baalim. 10:11 And the LORD said unto the children of Israel, Did not I deliver
you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the children of
Ammon, and from the Philistines? 10:12 The Zidonians also, and the
Amalekites, and the Maonites, did oppress you; and ye cried to me, and
I delivered you out of their hand. 10:13 Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods: wherefore I will
deliver you no more. 10:14 Go and cry unto the gods which ye have chosen; let them deliver
you in the time of your tribulation. 10:15 And the children of Israel said unto the LORD, We have sinned:
do thou unto us whatsoever seemeth good unto thee; deliver us only, we
pray thee, this day. 10:16 And they put away the strange gods from among them, and served
the LORD: and his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel. 10:17 Then the children of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped
in Gilead. And the children of Israel assembled themselves together,
and encamped in Mizpeh. 10:18 And the people and princes of Gilead said one to another, What
man is he that will begin to fight against the children of Ammon? he
shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead. 11:1 Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valour, and he was
the son of an harlot: and Gilead begat Jephthah. 11:2 And Gilead's wife bare him sons; and his wife's sons grew up, and
they thrust out Jephthah, and said unto him, Thou shalt not inherit in
our father's house; for thou art the son of a strange woman. 11:3 Then Jephthah fled from his brethren, and dwelt in the land of
Tob: and there were gathered vain men to Jephthah, and went out with
him. 11:4 And it came to pass in process of time, that the children of
Ammon made war against Israel. 11:5 And it was so, that when the children of Ammon made war against
Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of
Tob: 11:6 And they said unto Jephthah, Come, and be our captain, that
we may fight with the children of Ammon. 11:7 And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, Did not ye hate me,
and expel me out of my father's house? and why are ye come unto me now
when ye are in distress? 11:8 And the elders of Gilead said unto
Jephthah, Therefore we turn again to thee now, that thou mayest go
with us, and fight against the children of Ammon, and be our head over
all the inhabitants of Gilead. 11:9 And Jephthah said unto the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home
again to fight against the children of Ammon, and the LORD deliver
them before me, shall I be your head? 11:10 And the elders of Gilead
said unto Jephthah, The LORD be witness between us, if we do not so
according to thy words. 11:11 Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people
made him head and captain over them: and Jephthah uttered all his
words before the LORD in Mizpeh. 11:12 And Jephthah sent messengers unto the king of the children of
Ammon, saying, What hast thou to do with me, that thou art come
against me to fight in my land? 11:13 And the king of the children of
Ammon answered unto the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took
away my land, when they came up out of Egypt, from Arnon even unto
Jabbok, and unto Jordan: now therefore restore those lands again
peaceably. 11:14 And Jephthah sent messengers again unto the king of the children
of Ammon: 11:15 And said unto him, Thus saith Jephthah, Israel took
not away the land of Moab, nor the land of the children of Ammon:
11:16 But when Israel came up from Egypt, and walked through the
wilderness unto the Red sea, and came to Kadesh; 11:17 Then Israel
sent messengers unto the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee,
pass through thy land: but the king of Edom would not hearken thereto. And in like manner they sent unto the king of Moab: but he would not
consent: and Israel abode in Kadesh. 11:18 Then they went along through the wilderness, and compassed the
land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the
land of Moab, and pitched on the other side of Arnon, but came not
within the border of Moab: for Arnon was the border of Moab. 11:19 And Israel sent messengers unto Sihon king of the Amorites, the
king of Heshbon; and Israel said unto him, Let us pass, we pray thee,
through thy land into my place. 11:20 But Sihon trusted not Israel to pass through his coast: but
Sihon gathered all his people together, and pitched in Jahaz, and
fought against Israel. 11:21 And the LORD God of Israel delivered Sihon and all his people
into the hand of Israel, and they smote them: so Israel possessed all
the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country. 11:22 And they possessed all the coasts of the Amorites, from Arnon
even unto Jabbok, and from the wilderness even unto Jordan. 11:23 So now the LORD God of Israel hath dispossessed the Amorites
from before his people Israel, and shouldest thou possess it? 11:24
Wilt not thou possess that which Chemosh thy god giveth thee to
possess? So whomsoever the LORD our God shall drive out from before
us, them will we possess. 11:25 And now art thou any thing better than Balak the son of Zippor,
king of Moab? did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight
against them, 11:26 While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and her towns, and
in Aroer and her towns, and in all the cities that be along by the
coasts of Arnon, three hundred years? why therefore did ye not recover
them within that time? 11:27 Wherefore I have not sinned against
thee, but thou doest me wrong to war against me: the LORD the Judge be
judge this day between the children of Israel and the children of
Ammon. 11:28 Howbeit the king of the children of Ammon hearkened not unto the
words of Jephthah which he sent him. 11:29 Then the Spirit of the LORD came upon Jephthah, and he passed
over Gilead, and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from
Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over unto the children of Ammon. 11:30 And Jephthah vowed a vow unto the LORD, and said, If thou shalt
without fail deliver the children of Ammon into mine hands, 11:31 Then
it shall be, that whatsoever cometh forth of the doors of my house to
meet me, when I return in peace from the children of Ammon, shall
surely be the LORD's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering. 11:32 So Jephthah passed over unto the children of Ammon to fight
against them; and the LORD delivered them into his hands. 11:33 And he smote them from Aroer, even till thou come to Minnith,
even twenty cities, and unto the plain of the vineyards, with a very
great slaughter. Thus the children of Ammon were subdued before the
children of Israel. 11:34 And Jephthah came to Mizpeh unto his house, and, behold, his
daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances: and she
was his only child; beside her he had neither son nor daughter. 11:35 And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he rent his clothes,
and said, Alas, my daughter! thou hast brought me very low, and thou
art one of them that trouble me: for I have opened my mouth unto the
LORD, and I cannot go back. 11:36 And she said unto him, My father, if thou hast opened thy mouth
unto the LORD, do to me according to that which hath proceeded out of
thy mouth; forasmuch as the LORD hath taken vengeance for thee of
thine enemies, even of the children of Ammon. 11:37 And she said unto her father, Let this thing be done for me: let
me alone two months, that I may go up and down upon the mountains, and
bewail my virginity, I and my fellows. 11:38 And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months: and she
went with her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the
mountains. 11:39 And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned
unto her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had
vowed: and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel, 11:40 That
the daughters of Israel went yearly to lament the daughter of Jephthah
the Gileadite four days in a year. 12:1 And the men of Ephraim gathered themselves together, and went
northward, and said unto Jephthah, Wherefore passedst thou over to
fight against the children of Ammon, and didst not call us to go with
thee? we will burn thine house upon thee with fire. 12:2 And Jephthah said unto them, I and my people were at great strife
with the children of Ammon; and when I called you, ye delivered me not
out of their hands. 12:3 And when I saw that ye delivered me not, I put my life in my
hands, and passed over against the children of Ammon, and the LORD
delivered them into my hand: wherefore then are ye come up unto me
this day, to fight against me? 12:4 Then Jephthah gathered together
all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim: and the men of Gilead
smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye Gileadites are fugitives of
Ephraim among the Ephraimites, and among the Manassites. 12:5 And the Gileadites took the passages of Jordan before the
Ephraimites: and it was so, that when those Ephraimites which were
escaped said, Let me go over; that the men of Gilead said unto him,
Art thou an Ephraimite? If he said, Nay; 12:6 Then said they unto him,
Say now Shibboleth: and he said Sibboleth: for he could not frame to
pronounce it right. Then they took him, and slew him at the passages
of Jordan: and there fell at that time of the Ephraimites forty and
two thousand. 12:7 And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then died Jephthah the
Gileadite, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead. 12:8 And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel. 12:9 And he had thirty sons, and thirty daughters, whom he sent
abroad, and took in thirty daughters from abroad for his sons. And he
judged Israel seven years.