Why, the other end of the stick
always points the opposite way. It depends whether you
get hold of the stick by the right end. I saw the thing done once
and I've never believed in it since." And he proceeded to tell
the story of his disillusionment. It happened nearly twenty years before, when he was chaplain
to his co-religionists in a prison in Chicago--where the Irish population
displayed a capacity both for crime and penitence which kept him
tolerably busy. The official second-in-command under the Governor
was an ex-detective named Greywood Usher, a cadaverous, careful-spoken
Yankee philosopher, occasionally varying a very rigid visage
with an odd apologetic grimace. He liked Father Brown in
a slightly patronizing way; and Father Brown liked him,
though he heartily disliked his theories. His theories were
extremely complicated and were held with extreme simplicity. One evening he had sent for the priest, who, according to his custom,
took a seat in silence at a table piled and littered with papers,
and waited. The official selected from the papers a scrap of
newspaper cutting, which he handed across to the cleric,
who read it gravely. It appeared to be an extract from one of
the pinkest of American Society papers, and ran as follows:

     "Society's brightest widower is once more on the Freak Dinner stunt. All our exclusive citizens will recall the Perambulator Parade Dinner,
in which Last-Trick Todd, at his palatial home at Pilgrim's Pond,
caused so many of our prominent debutantes to look even younger
than their years. Equally elegant and more miscellaneous and
large-hearted in social outlook was Last-Trick's show the year previous,
the popular Cannibal Crush Lunch, at which the confections handed round
were sarcastically moulded in the forms of human arms and legs,
and during which more than one of our gayest mental gymnasts was heard
offering to eat his partner. The witticism which will inspire
this evening is as yet in Mr Todd's pretty reticent intellect,
or locked in the jewelled bosoms of our city's gayest leaders;
but there is talk of a pretty parody of the simple manners and customs
at the other end of Society's scale. This would be all the more telling,
as hospitable Todd is entertaining in Lord Falconroy, the famous traveller,
a true-blooded aristocrat fresh from England's oak-groves. Lord Falconroy's travels began before his ancient feudal title
was resurrected, he was in the Republic in his youth, and fashion murmurs
a sly reason for his return. Miss Etta Todd is one of our
deep-souled New Yorkers, and comes into an income of nearly
twelve hundred million dollars." "Well," asked Usher, "does that interest you?" "Why, words rather fail me," answered Father Brown. "I cannot think at this moment of anything in this world that would
interest me less. And, unless the just anger of the Republic is
at last going to electrocute journalists for writing like that,
I don't quite see why it should interest you either." "Ah!" said Mr Usher dryly, and handing across another
scrap of newspaper. "Well, does that interest you?" The paragraph was headed "Savage Murder of a Warder. Convict Escapes," and ran:  "Just before dawn this morning
a shout for help was heard in the Convict Settlement at Sequah
in this State. The authorities, hurrying in the direction of the cry,
found the corpse of the warder who patrols the top of the north wall
of the prison, the steepest and most difficult exit, for which one man
has always been found sufficient. The unfortunate officer had,
however, been hurled from the high wall, his brains beaten out
as with a club, and his gun was missing. Further inquiries showed that
one of the cells was empty; it had been occupied by a rather sullen ruffian
giving his name as Oscar Rian. He was only temporarily detained
for some comparatively trivial assault; but he gave everyone the impression
of a man with a black past and a dangerous future. Finally,
when daylight bad fully revealed the scene of murder, it was found
that he had written on the wall above the body a fragmentary sentence,
apparently with a finger dipped in blood:  `This was self-defence and
he had the gun. I meant no harm to him or any man but one. I am keeping the bullet for Pilgrim's Pond--O.R.' A man must have used
most fiendish treachery or most savage and amazing bodily daring
to have stormed such a wall in spite of an armed man." "Well, the literary style is somewhat improved," admitted the priest
cheerfully, "but still I don't see what I can do for you. I should cut a poor figure, with my short legs, running about this State
after an athletic assassin of that sort. I doubt whether
anybody could find him. The convict settlement at Sequah
is thirty miles from here; the country between is wild and tangled enough,
and the country beyond, where he will surely have the sense to go,
is a perfect no-man's land tumbling away to the prairies. He may be in any hole or up any tree." "He isn't in any hole," said the governor; "he isn't up any tree." "Why, how do you know?" asked Father Brown, blinking. "Would you like to speak to him?" inquired Usher. Father Brown opened his innocent eyes wide. "He is here?" he exclaimed. "Why, how did your men get hold of him?" "I got hold of him myself," drawled the American, rising and
lazily stretching his lanky legs before the fire. "I got hold of him
with the crooked end of a walking-stick. Don't look so surprised. I really did. You know I sometimes take a turn in the country lanes
outside this dismal place; well, I was walking early this evening
up a steep lane with dark hedges and grey-looking ploughed fields
on both sides; and a young moon was up and silvering the road. By the light of it I saw a man running across the field towards the road;
running with his body bent and at a good mile-race trot. He appeared to be much exhausted; but when he came to the thick black hedge
he went through it as if it were made of spiders' webs; --or rather
(for I heard the strong branches breaking and snapping like bayonets)
as if he himself were made of stone. In the instant in which
he appeared up against the moon, crossing the road, I slung my hooked cane
at his legs, tripping him and bringing him down. Then I blew my whistle
long and loud, and our fellows came running up to secure him." "It would have been rather awkward," remarked Brown,
"if you had found he was a popular athlete practising a mile race." "He was not," said Usher grimly. "We soon found out who he was;
but I had guessed it with the first glint of the moon on him." "You thought it was the runaway convict," observed the priest simply,
"because you had read in the newspaper cutting that morning that
a convict had run away." "I had somewhat better grounds," replied the governor coolly. "I pass over the first as too simple to be emphasized--
I mean that fashionable athletes do not run across ploughed fields
or scratch their eyes out in bramble hedges. Nor do they run
all doubled up like a crouching dog. There were more decisive details
to a fairly well-trained eye. The man was clad in coarse
and ragged clothes, but they were something more than merely
coarse and ragged. They were so ill-fitting as to be quite grotesque;
even as he appeared in black outline against the moonrise,
the coat-collar in which his head was buried made him look
like a hunchback, and the long loose sleeves looked as if he had no hands. It at once occurred to me that he had somehow managed to change
his convict clothes for some confederate's clothes which did not fit him. Second, there was a pretty stiff wind against which he was running;
so that I must have seen the streaky look of blowing hair, if the hair
had not been very short. Then I remembered that beyond these
ploughed fields he was crossing lay Pilgrim's Pond, for which
(you will remember) the convict was keeping his bullet;
and I sent my walking-stick flying." "A brilliant piece of rapid deduction," said Father Brown;
"but had he got a gun?" As Usher stopped abruptly in his walk the priest added apologetically:
"I've been told a bullet is not half so useful without it." "He had no gun," said the other gravely; "but that was doubtless
due to some very natural mischance or change of plans. Probably the
same policy that made him change the clothes made him drop the gun;
he began to repent the coat he had left behind him in the blood
of his victim." "Well, that is possible enough," answered the priest. "And it's hardly worth speculating on," said Usher,
turning to some other papers, "for we know it's the man by this time." His clerical friend asked faintly:  "But how?" And Greywood Usher
threw down the newspapers and took up the two press-cuttings again. "Well, since you are so obstinate," he said, "let's begin
at the beginning. You will notice that these two cuttings have only
one thing in common, which is the mention of Pilgrim's Pond,
the estate, as you know, of the millionaire Ireton Todd. You also know that he is a remarkable character; one of those
that rose on stepping-stones--"

     "Of our dead selves to higher things," assented his companion. "Yes; I know that. Petroleum, I think." "Anyhow," said Usher, "Last-Trick Todd counts for a great deal
in this rum affair." He stretched himself once more before the fire and continued talking
in his expansive, radiantly explanatory style. "To begin with, on the face of it, there is no mystery here at all. It is not mysterious, it is not even odd, that a jailbird should
take his gun to Pilgrim's Pond. Our people aren't like the English,
who will forgive a man for being rich if he throws away money
on hospitals or horses. Last-Trick Todd has made himself big
by his own considerable abilities; and there's no doubt that
many of those on whom he has shown his abilities would like to
show theirs on him with a shot-gun. Todd might easily get dropped
by some man he'd never even heard of; some labourer he'd locked out,
or some clerk in a business he'd busted. Last-Trick is a man
of mental endowments and a high public character; but in this country
the relations of employers and employed are considerably strained. "That's how the whole thing looks supposing this Rian
made for Pilgrim's Pond to kill Todd. So it looked to me,
till another little discovery woke up what I have of the detective in me. When I had my prisoner safe, I picked up my cane again and strolled down
the two or three turns of country road that brought me to one of
the side entrances of Todd's grounds, the one nearest to the pool
or lake after which the place is named. It was some two hours ago,
about seven by this time; the moonlight was more luminous,
and I could see the long white streaks of it lying on the mysterious mere
with its grey, greasy, half-liquid shores in which they say
our fathers used to make witches walk until they sank. I'd forgotten the exact tale; but you know the place I mean;
it lies north of Todd's house towards the wilderness, and has two queer
wrinkled trees, so dismal that they look more like huge fungoids
than decent foliage. As I stood peering at this misty pool,
I fancied I saw the faint figure of a man moving from the house towards it,
but it was all too dim and distant for one to be certain of the fact,
and still less of the details. Besides, my attention was very sharply
arrested by something much closer. I crouched behind the fence
which ran not more than two hundred yards from one wing of
the great mansion, and which was fortunately split in places,
as if specially for the application of a cautious eye. A door had opened
in the dark bulk of the left wing, and a figure appeared black against
the illuminated interior--a muffled figure bending forward,
evidently peering out into the night. It closed the door behind it,
and I saw it was carrying a lantern, which threw a patch of imperfect light
on the dress and figure of the wearer. It seemed to be
the figure of a woman, wrapped up in a ragged cloak and
evidently disguised to avoid notice; there was something very strange
both about the rags and the furtiveness in a person coming out of
those rooms lined with gold. She took cautiously the curved garden path
which brought her within half a hundred yards of me--, then she stood up
for an instant on the terrace of turf that looks towards the slimy lake,
and holding her flaming lantern above her head she deliberately swung it
three times to and fro as for a signal. As she swung it the second time
a flicker of its light fell for a moment on her own face,
a face that I knew. She was unnaturally pale, and her head was bundled
in her borrowed plebeian shawl; but I am certain it was Etta Todd,
the millionaire's daughter. "She retraced her steps in equal secrecy and the door
closed behind her again. I was about to climb the fence and follow,
when I realized that the detective fever that had lured me
into the adventure was rather undignified; and that in a more
authoritative capacity I already held all the cards in my hand. I was just turning away when a new noise broke on the night. A window was thrown up in one of the upper floors, but just round
the corner of the house so that I could not see it; and a voice
of terrible distinctness was heard shouting across the dark garden
to know where Lord Falconroy was, for he was missing from every room
in the house. There was no mistaking that voice. I have
heard it on many a political platform or meeting of directors;
it was Ireton Todd himself. Some of the others seemed to have gone
to the lower windows or on to the steps, and were calling up to him
that Falconroy had gone for a stroll down to the Pilgrim's Pond
an hour before, and could not be traced since. Then Todd cried
`Mighty Murder!' and shut down the window violently; and I could hear him
plunging down the stairs inside. Repossessing myself of my former
and wiser purpose, I whipped out of the way of the general search
that must follow; and returned here not later than eight o'clock. "I now ask you to recall that little Society paragraph
which seemed to you so painfully lacking in interest. If the convict
was not keeping the shot for Todd, as he evidently wasn't,
it is most likely that he was keeping it for Lord Falconroy;
and it looks as if he had delivered the goods. No more handy place
to shoot a man than in the curious geological surroundings of that pool,
where a body thrown down would sink through thick slime to a depth
practically unknown. Let us suppose, then, that our friend
with the cropped hair came to kill Falconroy and not Todd. But, as I have pointed out, there are many reasons why people in America
might want to kill Todd. There is no reason why anybody in America
should want to kill an English lord newly landed, except for the one reason
mentioned in the pink paper--that the lord is paying his attentions
to the millionaire's daughter. Our crop-haired friend,
despite his ill-fitting clothes, must be an aspiring lover. "I know the notion will seem to you jarring and even comic;
but that's because you are English. It sounds to you like saying
the Archbishop of Canterbury's daughter will be married in
St George's, Hanover Square, to a crossing-sweeper on ticket-of-leave. You don't do justice to the climbing and aspiring power of our
more remarkable citizens. You see a good-looking grey-haired man
in evening-dress with a sort of authority about him, you know he is
a pillar of the State, and you fancy he had a father. You are in error. You do not realize that a comparatively few years ago he may have been
in a tenement or (quite likely) in a jail. You don't allow for our
national buoyancy and uplift. Many of our most influential citizens
have not only risen recently, but risen comparatively late in life. Todd's daughter was fully eighteen when her father first made his pile;
so there isn't really anything impossible in her having a hanger-on
in low life; or even in her hanging on to him, as I think
she must be doing, to judge by the lantern business. If so,
the hand that held the lantern may not be unconnected with the hand
that held the gun. This case, sir, will make a noise." "Well," said the priest patiently, "and what did you do next?" "I reckon you'll be shocked," replied Greywood Usher,
"as I know you don't cotton to the march of science in these matters. I am given a good deal of discretion here, and perhaps take a little more
than I'm given; and I thought it was an excellent opportunity to test
that Psychometric Machine I told you about. Now, in my opinion,
that machine can't lie." "No machine can lie," said Father Brown; "nor can it tell the truth." "It did in this case, as I'll show you," went on Usher positively. "I sat the man in the ill-fitting clothes in a comfortable chair,
and simply wrote words on a blackboard; and the machine simply
recorded the variations of his pulse; and I simply observed his manner. The trick is to introduce some word connected with the supposed crime
in a list of words connected with something quite different,
yet a list in which it occurs quite naturally. Thus I wrote `heron' and
`eagle' and `owl', and when I wrote `falcon' he was tremendously agitated;
and when I began to make an `r' at the end of the word,
that machine just bounded. Who else in this republic has any reason
to jump at the name of a newly-arrived Englishman like Falconroy
except the man who's shot him? Isn't that better evidence than
a lot of gabble  from  witnesses--if the evidence of a reliable machine?" "You always forget," observed his companion, "that the reliable machine
always has to be worked by an unreliable machine." "Why, what do you mean?" asked the detective. "I mean Man," said Father Brown, "the most unreliable machine
I know of. I don't want to be rude; and I don't think you will consider
Man to be an offensive or inaccurate description of yourself. You say you observed his manner; but how do you know you observed it right? You say the words have to come in a natural way; but how do you know
that you did it naturally? How do you know, if you come to that,
that he did not observe your manner? Who is to prove that you were not
tremendously agitated? There was no machine tied on to your pulse." "I tell you," cried the American in the utmost excitement,
"I was as cool as a cucumber." "Criminals also can be as cool as cucumbers," said Brown
with a smile. "And almost as cool as you." "Well, this one wasn't," said Usher, throwing the papers about. "Oh, you make me tired!" "I'm sorry," said the other. "I only point out what seems
a reasonable possibility. If you could tell by his manner when
the word that might hang him had come, why shouldn't he tell
from your manner that the word that might hang him was coming? I should ask for more than words myself before I hanged anybody." Usher smote the table and rose in a sort of angry triumph. "And that," he cried, "is just what I'm going to give you. I tried the machine first just in order to test the thing in other ways
afterwards and the machine, sir, is right." He paused a moment and resumed with less excitement. "I rather want to insist, if it comes to that, that so far
I had very little to go on except the scientific experiment. There was really nothing against the man at all. His clothes were
ill-fitting, as I've said, but they were rather better, if anything,
than those of the submerged class to which he evidently belonged. Moreover, under all the stains of his plunging through ploughed fields
or bursting through dusty hedges, the man was comparatively clean. This might mean, of course, that he had only just broken prison;
but it reminded me more of the desperate decency of the comparatively
respectable poor. His demeanour was, I am bound to confess,
quite in accordance with theirs. He was silent and dignified as they are;
he seemed to have a big, but buried, grievance, as they do. He professed total ignorance of the crime and the whole question;
and showed nothing but a sullen impatience for something sensible
that might come to take him out of his meaningless scrape. He asked me more than once if he could telephone for a lawyer
who had helped him a long time ago in a trade dispute, and in every sense
acted as you would expect an innocent man to act. There was nothing
against him in the world except that little finger on the dial
that pointed to the change of his pulse. "Then, sir, the machine was on its trial; and the machine was right. By the time I came with him out of the private room into the vestibule
where all sorts of other people were awaiting examination,
I think he had already more or less made up his mind to clear things up
by something like a confession. He turned to me and began to say
in a low voice:  `Oh, I can't stick this any more. If you must know
all about me--'

     "At the same instant one of the poor women sitting on the long bench
stood up, screaming aloud and pointing at him with her finger. I have never in my life heard anything more demoniacally distinct. Her lean finger seemed to pick him out as if it were a pea-shooter. Though the word was a mere howl, every syllable was as clear
as a separate stroke on the clock. "`Drugger Davis!' she shouted. `They've got Drugger Davis!' "Among the wretched women, mostly thieves and streetwalkers,
twenty faces were turned, gaping with glee and hate. If I had never
heard the words, I should have known by the very shock upon his features
that the so-called Oscar Rian had heard his real name. But I'm not quite
so ignorant, you may be surprised to hear. Drugger Davis was
one of the most terrible and depraved criminals that ever
baffled our police. It is certain he had done murder more than once
long before his last exploit with the warder. But he was never entirely
fixed for it, curiously enough because he did it in the same manner
as those milder--or meaner--crimes for which he was fixed pretty often. He was a handsome, well-bred-looking brute, as he still is, to some extent;
and he used mostly to go about with barmaids or shop-girls and do them
out of their money. Very often, though, he went a good deal farther;
and they were found drugged with cigarettes or chocolates and
their whole property missing. Then came one case where the girl
was found dead; but deliberation could not quite be proved, and,
what was more practical still, the criminal could not be found. I heard a rumour of his having reappeared somewhere in the opposite
character this time, lending money instead of borrowing it;
but still to such poor widows as he might personally fascinate,
but still with the same bad result for them. Well, there is
your innocent man, and there is his innocent record. Even, since then,
four criminals and three warders have identified him and confirmed the story. Now what have you got to say to my poor little machine after that? Hasn't the machine done for him? Or do you prefer to say that the woman
and I have done for him?" "As to what you've done for him," replied Father Brown,
rising and shaking himself in a floppy way, "you've saved him from
the electrical chair. I don't think they can kill Drugger Davis
on that old vague story of the poison; and as for the convict
who killed the warder, I suppose it's obvious that you haven't got him. Mr Davis is innocent of that crime, at any rate." "What do you mean?" demanded the other. "Why should he be
innocent of that crime?" "Why, bless us all!" cried the small man in one of his rare
moments of animation, "why, because he's guilty of the other crimes! I don't know what you people are made of. You seem to think that
all sins are kept together in a bag. You talk as if a miser on Monday
were always a spendthrift on Tuesday. You tell me this man you have here
spent weeks and months wheedling needy women out of small sums of money;
that he used a drug at the best, and a poison at the worst;
that he turned up afterwards as the lowest kind of moneylender,
and cheated most poor people in the same patient and pacific style. Let it be granted--let us admit, for the sake of argument,
that he did all this. If that is so, I will tell you what he didn't do. He didn't storm a spiked wall against a man with a loaded gun. He didn't write on the wall with his own hand, to say he had done it. He didn't stop to state that his justification was self-defence. He didn't explain that he had no quarrel with the poor warder. He didn't name the house of the rich man to which he was going with the gun. He didn't write his own, initials in a man's blood. Saints alive! Can't you see the whole character is different, in good and evil? Why, you don't seem to be like I am a bit. One would think
you'd never had any vices of your own." The amazed American had already parted his lips in protest
when the door of his private and official room was hammered
and rattled in an unceremonious way to which he was totally unaccustomed. The door flew open. The moment before Greywood Usher had been
coming to the conclusion that Father Brown might possibly be mad. The moment after he began to think he was mad himself. There burst and fell into his private room a man in the filthiest rags,
with a greasy squash hat still askew on his head, and a shabby green shade
shoved up from one of his eyes, both of which were glaring like a tiger's. The rest of his face was almost undiscoverable, being masked with
a matted beard and whiskers through which the nose could barely
thrust itself, and further buried in a squalid red scarf or handkerchief. Mr Usher prided himself on having seen most of the roughest specimens
in the State, but he thought he had never seen such a baboon dressed
as a scarecrow as this. But, above all, he had never in all his
placid scientific existence heard a man like that speak to him first. "See here, old man Usher," shouted the being in the red handkerchief,
"I'm getting tired. Don't you try any of your hide-and-seek on me;
I don't get fooled any. Leave go of my guests, and I'll let up
on the fancy clockwork. Keep him here for a split instant and you'll
feel pretty mean. I reckon I'm not a man with no pull." The eminent Usher was regarding the bellowing monster
with an amazement which had dried up all other sentiments. The mere shock to his eyes had rendered his ears, almost useless. At last he rang a bell with a hand of violence. While the bell was
still strong and pealing, the voice of Father Brown fell soft but distinct. "I have a suggestion to make," he said, "but it seems
a little confusing. I don't know this gentleman--but--
but I think I know him. Now, you know him--you know him quite well--
but you don't know him--naturally. Sounds paradoxical, I know." "I reckon the Cosmos is cracked," said Usher, and fell asprawl
in his round office chair. "Now, see here," vociferated the stranger, striking the table,
but speaking in a voice that was all the more mysterious
because it was comparatively mild and rational though still resounding. "I won't let you in. I want--"

     "Who in hell are you?" yelled Usher, suddenly sitting up straight. "I think the gentleman's name is Todd," said the priest. Then he picked up the pink slip of newspaper. "I fear you don't read the Society papers properly," he said,
and began to read out in a monotonous voice, "`Or locked in
the jewelled bosoms of our city's gayest leaders; but there is talk
of a pretty parody of the manners and customs of the other end
of Society's scale.' There's been a big Slum Dinner up at
Pilgrim's Pond tonight; and a man, one of the guests, disappeared. Mr Ireton Todd is a good host, and has tracked him here,
without even waiting to take off his fancy-dress." "What man do you mean?" "I mean the man with comically ill-fitting clothes you saw
running across the ploughed field. Hadn't you better go and
investigate him? He will be rather impatient to get back to his champagne,
from which he ran away in such a hurry, when the convict with the gun
hove in sight." "Do you seriously mean--" began the official. "Why, look here, Mr Usher," said Father Brown quietly,
"you said the machine couldn't make a mistake; and in one sense it didn't. But the other machine did; the machine that worked it. You assumed that the man in rags jumped at the name of Lord Falconroy,
because he was Lord Falconroy's murderer. He jumped at the name
of Lord Falconroy because he is Lord Falconroy." "Then why the blazes didn't he say so?" demanded the staring Usher. "He felt his plight and recent panic were hardly patrician,"
replied the priest, "so he tried to keep the name back at first. But he was just going to tell it you, when"--and Father Brown looked
down at his boots--"when a woman found another name for him." "But you can't be so mad as to say," said Greywood Usher,
very white, "that Lord Falconroy was Drugger Davis." The priest looked at him very earnestly, but with a baffling
and undecipherable face. "I am not saying anything about it," he said. "I leave
all the rest to you. Your pink paper says that the title
was recently revived for him; but those papers are very unreliable. It says he was in the States in youth; but the whole story seems
very strange. Davis and Falconroy are both pretty considerable cowards,
but so are lots of other men. I would not hang a dog on my own opinion
about this. But I think," he went on softly and reflectively,
"I think you Americans are too modest. I think you idealize
the English aristocracy--even in assuming it to be so aristocratic. You see a good-looking Englishman in evening-dress; you know
he's in the House of Lords; and you fancy he has a father. You don't allow for our national buoyancy and uplift. Many of our
most influential noblemen have not only risen recently, but--"

     "Oh, stop it!" cried Greywood Usher, wringing one lean hand
in impatience against a shade of irony in the other's face. "Don't stay talking to this lunatic!" cried Todd brutally. "Take me to my friend." Next morning Father Brown appeared with the same demure expression,
carrying yet another piece of pink newspaper. "I'm afraid you neglect the fashionable press rather," he said,
"but this cutting may interest you." Usher read the headlines, "Last-Trick's Strayed Revellers:
Mirthful Incident near Pilgrim's Pond." The paragraph went on:
"A laughable occurrence took place outside Wilkinson's Motor Garage
last night. A policeman on duty had his attention drawn by larrikins
to a man in prison dress who was stepping with considerable coolness
into the steering-seat of a pretty high-toned Panhard; he was accompanied
by a girl wrapped in a ragged shawl. On the police interfering,
the young woman threw back the shawl, and all recognized
Millionaire Todd's daughter, who had just come from the Slum Freak Dinner
at the Pond, where all the choicest guests were in a similar deshabille. She and the gentleman who had donned prison uniform were going for
the customary joy-ride." Under the pink slip Mr Usher found a strip of a later paper,
headed, "Astounding Escape of Millionaire's Daughter with Convict. She had Arranged Freak Dinner. Now Safe in--"

     Mr Greenwood Usher lifted his eyes, but Father Brown was gone. VI. The Head of Caesar


THERE is somewhere in Brompton or Kensington an interminable avenue
of tall houses, rich but largely empty, that looks like a terrace of tombs. The very steps up to the dark front doors seem as steep as
the side of pyramids; one would hesitate to knock at the door,
lest it should be opened by a mummy. But a yet more depressing feature
in the grey facade is its telescopic length and changeless continuity. The pilgrim walking down it begins to think he will never come to
a break or a corner; but there is one exception--a very small one,
but hailed by the pilgrim almost with a shout. There is a sort of mews
between two of the tall mansions, a mere slit like the crack of a door
by comparison with the street, but just large enough to permit
a pigmy ale-house or eating-house, still allowed by the rich to their
stable-servants, to stand in the angle. There is something cheery in its
very dinginess, and something free and elfin in its very insignificance. At the feet of those grey stone giants it looks like a lighted house
of dwarfs. Anyone passing the place during a certain autumn evening,
itself almost fairylike, might have seen a hand pull aside
the red half-blind which (along with some large white lettering)
half hid the interior from the street, and a face peer out not unlike
a rather innocent goblin's. It was, in fact, the face of one with
the harmless human name of Brown, formerly priest of Cobhole in Essex,
and now working in London. His friend, Flambeau, a semi-official
investigator, was sitting opposite him, making his last notes of a case
he had cleared up in the neighbourhood. They were sitting at a small table,
close up to the window, when the priest pulled the curtain back
and looked out. He waited till a stranger in the street had
passed the window, to let the curtain fall into its place again. Then his round eyes rolled to the large white lettering on the window
above his head, and then strayed to the next table, at which sat only
a navvy with beer and cheese, and a young girl with red hair and
a glass of milk. Then (seeing his friend put away the pocket-book),
he said softly:

     "If you've got ten minutes, I wish you'd follow that man with
the false nose." Flambeau looked up in surprise; but the girl with the red hair
also looked up, and with something that was stronger than astonishment. She was simply and even loosely dressed in light brown sacking stuff;
but she was a lady, and even, on a second glance, a rather needlessly
haughty one. "The man with the false nose!" repeated Flambeau. "Who's he?" "I haven't a notion," answered Father Brown. "I want you
to find out; I ask it as a favour. He went down there"--and he jerked
his thumb over his shoulder in one of his undistinguished gestures--
"and can't have passed three lamp-posts yet. I only want to know
the direction." Flambeau gazed at his friend for some time, with an expression
between perplexity and amusement; and then, rising from the table;
squeezed his huge form out of the little door of the dwarf tavern,
and melted into the twilight. Father Brown took a small book out of his pocket and began
to read steadily; he betrayed no consciousness of the fact that
the red-haired lady had left her own table and sat down opposite him. At last she leaned over and said in a low, strong voice:
"Why do you say that? How do you know it's false?" He lifted his rather heavy eyelids, which fluttered in
considerable embarrassment. Then his dubious eye roamed again to
the white lettering on the glass front of the public-house. The young woman's eyes followed his, and rested there also,
but in pure puzzledom. "No," said Father Brown, answering her thoughts. "It doesn't say
`Sela', like the thing in the Psalms; I read it like that myself when
I was wool-gathering just now; it says `Ales.'" "Well?" inquired the staring young lady. "What does it matter
what it says?" His ruminating eye roved to the girl's light canvas sleeve,
round the wrist of which ran a very slight thread of artistic pattern,
just enough to distinguish it from a working-dress of a common woman
and make it more like the working-dress of a lady art-student. He seemed to find much food for thought in this; but his reply was
very slow and hesitant. "You see, madam," he said, "from outside
the place looks--well, it is a perfectly decent place--but ladies
like you don't--don't generally think so. They never go into such places
from choice, except--"

     "Well?" she repeated. "Except an unfortunate few who don't go in to drink milk." "You are a most singular person," said the young lady. "What is your object in all this?" "Not to trouble you about it," he replied, very gently. "Only to arm myself with knowledge enough to help you, if ever
you freely ask my help." "But why should I need help?" He continued his dreamy monologue. "You couldn't have come in
to see protegees, humble friends, that sort of thing, or you'd have
gone through into the parlour...and you couldn't have come in because
you were ill, or you'd have spoken to the woman of the place,
who's obviously respectable...besides, you don't look ill in that way,
but only unhappy.... This street is the only original long lane
that has no turning; and the houses on both sides are shut up.... I could only suppose that you'd seen somebody coming whom you didn't want
to meet; and found the public-house was the only shelter in this
wilderness of stone.... I don't think I went beyond the licence of
a stranger in glancing at the only man who passed immediately after....
And as I thought he looked like the wrong sort...and you looked like
the right sort.... I held myself ready to help if he annoyed you;
that is all. As for my friend, he'll be back soon; and he certainly
can't find out anything by stumping down a road like this.... I didn't think he could." "Then why did you send him out?" she cried, leaning forward with
yet warmer curiosity. She had the proud, impetuous face that goes
with reddish colouring, and a Roman nose, as it did in Marie Antoinette. He looked at her steadily for the first time, and said:
"Because I hoped you would speak to me." She looked back at him for some time with a heated face,
in which there hung a red shadow of anger; then, despite her anxieties,
humour broke out of her eyes and the corners of her mouth,
and she answered almost grimly:  "Well, if you're so keen on
my conversation, perhaps you'll answer my question." After a pause
she added:  "I had the honour to ask you why you thought the man's nose
was false." "The wax always spots like that just a little in this weather,"
answered Father Brown with entire simplicity,

     "But it's such a crooked nose," remonstrated the red-haired girl. The priest smiled in his turn. "I don't say it's the sort of nose
one would wear out of mere foppery," he admitted. "This man, I think,
wears it because his real nose is so much nicer." "But why?" she insisted. "What is the nursery-rhyme?" observed Brown absent-mindedly. "There was a crooked man and he went a crooked mile....  That man,
I fancy, has gone a very crooked road--by following his nose." "Why, what's he done?" she demanded, rather shakily. "I don't want to force your confidence by a hair," said Father Brown,
very quietly. "But I think you could tell me more about that than
I can tell you." The girl sprang to her feet and stood quite quietly, but with
clenched hands, like one about to stride away; then her hands
loosened slowly, and she sat down again. "You are more of a mystery
than all the others," she said desperately, "but I feel there might be
a heart in your mystery." "What we all dread most," said the priest in a low voice,
"is a maze with no centre. That is why atheism is only a nightmare." "I will tell you everything," said the red-haired girl doggedly,
"except why I am telling you; and that I don't know." She picked at the darned table-cloth and went on:  "You look as if
you knew what isn't snobbery as well as what is; and when I say that
ours is a good old family, you'll understand it is a necessary part of
the story; indeed, my chief danger is in my brother's high-and-dry notions,
noblesse oblige and all that. Well, my name is Christabel Carstairs;
and my father was that Colonel Carstairs you've probably heard of,
who made the famous Carstairs Collection of Roman coins. I could never describe my father to you; the nearest I can say is
that he was very like a Roman coin himself. He was as handsome and
as genuine and as valuable and as metallic and as out-of-date. He was prouder of his Collection than of his coat-of-arms--
nobody could say more than that. His extraordinary character
came out most in his will. He had two sons and one daughter. He quarrelled with one son, my brother Giles, and sent him
to Australia on a small allowance. He then made a will leaving
the Carstairs Collection, actually with a yet smaller allowance,
to my brother Arthur. He meant it as a reward, as the highest honour
he could offer, in acknowledgement of Arthur's loyalty and rectitude
and the distinctions he had already gained in mathematics and economics
at Cambridge. He left me practically all his pretty large fortune;
and I am sure he meant it in contempt. "Arthur, you may say, might well complain of this; but Arthur
is my father over again. Though he had some differences with my
father in early youth, no sooner had he taken over the Collection
than he became like a pagan priest dedicated to a temple. He mixed up these Roman halfpence with the honour of the Carstairs
family in the same stiff, idolatrous way as his father before him. He acted as if Roman money must be guarded by all the Roman virtues. He took no pleasures; he spent nothing on himself; he lived for
the Collection. Often he would not trouble to dress for his simple meals;
but pattered about among the corded brown-paper parcels (which no one else
was allowed to touch) in an old brown dressing-gown. With its rope
and tassel and his pale, thin, refined face, it made him look like
an old ascetic monk. Every now and then, though, he would appear
dressed like a decidedly fashionable gentleman; but that was only when
he went up to the London sales or shops to make an addition to
the Carstairs Collection. "Now, if you've known any young people, you won't be shocked
if I say that I got into rather a low frame of mind with all this;
the frame of mind in which one begins to say that the Ancient Romans
were all very well in their way. I'm not like my brother Arthur;
I can't help enjoying enjoyment. I got a lot of romance and rubbish
where I got my red hair, from the other side of the family. Poor Giles was the same; and I think the atmosphere of coins
might count in excuse for him; though he really did wrong and nearly
went to prison. But he didn't behave any worse than I did;
as you shall hear. "I come now to the silly part of the story. I think a man
as clever as you can guess the sort of thing that would begin
to relieve the monotony for an unruly girl of seventeen placed in such
a position. But I am so rattled with more dreadful things that I can
hardly read my own feeling; and don't know whether I despise it now
as a flirtation or bear it as a broken heart. We lived then at
a little seaside watering-place in South Wales, and a retired sea-captain
living a few doors off had a son about five years older than myself,
who had been a friend of Giles before he went to the Colonies. His name does not affect my tale; but I tell you it was Philip Hawker,
because I am telling you everything. We used to go shrimping together,
and said and thought we were in love with each other; at least
he certainly said he was, and I certainly thought I was. If I tell you he had bronzed curly hair and a falconish sort of face,
bronzed by the sea also, it's not for his sake, I assure you,
but for the story; for it was the cause of a very curious coincidence. "One summer afternoon, when I had promised to go shrimping
along the sands with Philip, I was waiting rather impatiently
in the front drawing-room, watching Arthur handle some packets of coins
he had just purchased and slowly shunt them, one or two at a time,
into his own dark study and museum which was at the back of the house. As soon as I heard the heavy door close on him finally, I made a bolt
for my shrimping-net and tam-o'-shanter and was just going to slip out,
when I saw that my brother had left behind him one coin that lay
gleaming on the long bench by the window. It was a bronze coin,
and the colour, combined with the exact curve of the Roman nose
and something in the very lift of the long, wiry neck, made the head
of Caesar on it the almost precise portrait of Philip Hawker. Then I suddenly remembered Giles telling Philip of a coin that was
like him, and Philip wishing he had it. Perhaps you can fancy the wild,
foolish thoughts with which my head went round; I felt as if I had
had a gift from the fairies. It seemed to me that if I could only
run away with this, and give it to Philip like a wild sort of wedding-ring,
it would be a bond between us for ever; I felt a thousand such things
at once. Then there yawned under me, like the pit, the enormous,
awful notion of what I was doing; above all, the unbearable thought,
which was like touching hot iron, of what Arthur would think of it. A Carstairs a thief; and a thief of the Carstairs treasure! I believe my brother could see me burned like a witch for such a thing,
But then, the very thought of such fanatical cruelty heightened
my old hatred of his dingy old antiquarian fussiness and my longing
for the youth and liberty that called to me from the sea. Outside was strong sunlight with a wind; and a yellow head of some
broom or gorse in the garden rapped against the glass of the window. I thought of that living and growing gold calling to me from all
the heaths of the world--and then of that dead, dull gold and bronze
and brass of my brother's growing dustier and dustier as life went by. Nature and the Carstairs Collection had come to grips at last. "Nature is older than the Carstairs Collection. As I ran
down the streets to the sea, the coin clenched tight in my fist,
I felt all the Roman Empire on my back as well as the Carstairs pedigree. It was not only the old lion argent that was roaring in my ear,
but all the eagles of the Caesars seemed flapping and screaming
in pursuit of me. And yet my heart rose higher and higher like
a child's kite, until I came over the loose, dry sand-hills and to
the flat, wet sands, where Philip stood already up to his ankles
in the shallow shining water, some hundred yards out to sea. There was a great red sunset; and the long stretch of low water,
hardly rising over the ankle for half a mile, was like a lake
of ruby flame. It was not till I had torn off my shoes and stockings
and waded to where he stood, which was well away from the dry land,
that I turned and looked round. We were quite alone in a circle
of sea-water and wet sand, and I gave him the head of Caesar. "At the very instant I had a shock of fancy:  that a man far away
on the sand-hills was looking at me intently. I must have felt
immediately after that it was a mere leap of unreasonable nerves;
for the man was only a dark dot in the distance, and I could only just see
that he was standing quite still and gazing, with his head a little
on one side. There was no earthly logical evidence that he was
looking at me; he might have been looking at a ship, or the sunset,
or the sea-gulls, or at any of the people who still strayed here and there
on the shore between us. Nevertheless, whatever my start sprang from
was prophetic; for, as I gazed, he started walking briskly in a bee-line
towards us across the wide wet sands. As he drew nearer and nearer
I saw that he was dark and bearded, and that his eyes were marked with
dark spectacles. He was dressed poorly but respectably in black,
from the old black top hat on his head to the solid black boots
on his feet. In spite of these he walked straight into the sea
without a flash of hesitation, and came on at me with the steadiness
of a travelling bullet. "I can't tell you the sense of monstrosity and miracle I had
when he thus silently burst the barrier between land and water. It was as if he had walked straight off a cliff and still marched
steadily in mid-air. It was as if a house had flown up into the sky
or a man's head had fallen off. He was only wetting his boots;
but he seemed to be a demon disregarding a law of Nature. If he had
hesitated an instant at the water's edge it would have been nothing. As it was, he seemed to look so much at me alone as not to notice the ocean. Philip was some yards away with his back to me, bending over his net. The stranger came on till he stood within two yards of me, the water
washing half-way up to his knees. Then he said, with a clearly modulated
and rather mincing articulation:  `Would it discommode you to contribute
elsewhere a coin with a somewhat different superscription?' "With one exception there was nothing definably abnormal about him. His tinted glasses were not really opaque, but of a blue kind common enough,
nor were the eyes behind them shifty, but regarded me steadily. His dark beard was not really long or wild--, but he looked rather hairy,
because the beard began very high up in his face, just under
the cheek-bones. His complexion was neither sallow nor livid,
but on the contrary rather clear and youthful; yet this gave
a pink-and-white wax look which somehow (I don't know why) rather
increased the horror. The only oddity one could fix was that his nose,
which was otherwise of a good shape, was just slightly turned sideways
at the tip; as if, when it was soft, it had been tapped on one side
with a toy hammer. The thing was hardly a deformity; yet I cannot
tell you what a living nightmare it was to me. As he stood there
in the sunset-stained water he affected me as some hellish sea-monster
just risen roaring out of a sea like blood. I don't know why
a touch on the nose should affect my imagination so much. I think it seemed as if he could move his nose like a finger. And as if he had just that moment moved it. "`Any little assistance,' he continued with the same queer,
priggish accent, `that may obviate the necessity of my communicating
with the family.' "Then it rushed over me that I was being blackmailed for
the theft of the bronze piece; and all my merely superstitious fears
and doubts were swallowed up in one overpowering, practical question. How could he have found out? I had stolen the thing suddenly and on impulse;
I was certainly alone; for I always made sure of being unobserved
when I slipped out to see Philip in this way. I had not,
to all appearance, been followed in the street; and if I had,
they could not `X-ray' the coin in my closed hand. The man standing
on the sand-hills could no more have seen what I gave Philip than
shoot a fly in one eye, like the man in the fairy-tale. "`Philip,' I cried helplessly, `ask this man what he wants.' "When Philip lifted his head at last from mending his net
he looked rather red, as if sulky or ashamed; but it may have been
only the exertion of stooping and the red evening light; I may have
only had another of the morbid fancies that seemed to be dancing about me. He merely said gruffly to the man: `You clear out of this.' And, motioning me to follow, set off wading shoreward without paying
further attention to him. He stepped on to a stone breakwater that
ran out from among the roots of the sand-hills, and so struck homeward,
perhaps thinking our incubus would find it less easy to walk on such
rough stones, green and slippery with seaweed, than we, who were young
and used to it. But my persecutor walked as daintily as he talked;
and he still followed me, picking his way and picking his phrases. I heard his delicate, detestable voice appealing to me over my shoulder,
until at last, when we had crested the sand-hills, Philip's patience
(which was by no means so conspicuous on most occasions) seemed to snap. He turned suddenly, saying, `Go back. I can't talk to you now.' And as the man hovered and opened his mouth, Philip struck him a buffet
on it that sent him flying from the top of the tallest sand-hill
to the bottom. I saw him crawling out below, covered with sand. "This stroke comforted me somehow, though it might well increase
my peril; but Philip showed none of his usual elation at his own prowess. Though as affectionate as ever, he still seemed cast down; and before
I could ask him anything fully, he parted with me at his own gate,
with two remarks that struck me as strange. He said that,
all things considered, I ought to put the coin back in the Collection;
but that he himself would keep it `for the present'. And then he added
quite suddenly and irrelevantly:, `You know Giles is back from Australia?'" The door of the tavern opened and the gigantic shadow of
the investigator Flambeau fell across the table. Father Brown
presented him to the lady in his own slight, persuasive style of speech,
mentioning his knowledge and sympathy in such cases; and almost
without knowing, the girl was soon reiterating her story to two listeners. But Flambeau, as he bowed and sat down, handed the priest a small slip
of paper. Brown accepted it with some surprise and read on it:
"Cab to Wagga Wagga, 379, Mafeking Avenue, Putney." The girl was going
on with her story. "I went up the steep street to my own house with my head in a whirl;
it had not begun to clear when I came to the doorstep, on which
I found a milk-can--and the man with the twisted nose. The milk-can
told me the servants were all out; for, of course, Arthur,
browsing about in his brown dressing-gown in a brown study,
would not hear or answer a bell. Thus there was no one to help me
in the house, except my brother, whose help must be my ruin. In desperation I thrust two shillings into the horrid thing's hand,
and told him to call again in a few days, when I had thought it out. He went off sulking, but more sheepishly than I had expected--
perhaps he had been shaken by his fall--and I watched the star of sand
splashed on his back receding down the road with a horrid vindictive
pleasure. He turned a corner some six houses down. "Then I let myself in, made myself some tea, and tried to
think it out. I sat at the drawing-room window looking on to the garden,
which still glowed with the last full evening light. But I was too
distracted and dreamy to look at the lawns and flower-pots and flower-beds
with any concentration. So I took the shock the more sharply because
I'd seen it so slowly. "The man or monster I'd sent away was standing quite still
in the middle of the garden. Oh, we've all read a lot about
pale-faced phantoms in the dark; but this was more dreadful
than anything of that kind could ever be. Because, though he cast
a long evening shadow, he still stood in warm sunlight. And because
his face was not pale, but had that waxen bloom still upon it
that belongs to a barber's dummy. He stood quite still, with his face
towards me; and I can't tell you how horrid he looked among the tulips
and all those tall, gaudy, almost hothouse-looking flowers. It looked as if we'd stuck up a waxwork instead of a statue in
the centre of our garden. "Yet almost the instant he saw me move in the window he turned
and ran out of the garden by the back gate, which stood open and
by which he had undoubtedly entered. This renewed timidity on his part
was so different from the impudence with which he had walked into the sea,
that I felt vaguely comforted. I fancied, perhaps, that he feared
confronting Arthur more than I knew. Anyhow, I settled down at last,
and had a quiet dinner alone (for it was against the rules to
disturb Arthur when he was rearranging the museum), and, my thoughts,
a little released, fled to Philip and lost themselves, I suppose. Anyhow, I was looking blankly, but rather pleasantly than otherwise,
at another window, uncurtained, but by this time black as a slate
with the final night-fall. It seemed to me that something like a snail
was on the outside of the window-pane. But when I stared harder,
it was more like a man's thumb pressed on the pane; it had that curled look
that a thumb has. With my fear and courage re-awakened together,
I rushed at the window and then recoiled with a strangled scream
that any man but Arthur must have heard. "For it was not a thumb, any more than it was a snail. It was the tip of a crooked nose, crushed against the glass;
it looked white with the pressure; and the staring face and eyes
behind it were at first invisible and afterwards grey like a ghost. I slammed the shutters together somehow, rushed up to my room and
locked myself in. But, even as I passed, I could swear I saw
a second black window with something on it that was like a snail. "It might be best to go to Arthur after all. If the thing
was crawling close all around the house like a cat, it might have
purposes worse even than blackmail. My brother might cast me out
and curse me for ever, but he was a gentleman, and would defend me
on the spot. After ten minutes' curious thinking, I went down,
knocked on the door and then went in:  to see the last and worst sight. "My brother's chair was empty, and he was obviously out. But the man with the crooked nose was sitting waiting for his return,
with his hat still insolently on his head, and actually reading
one of my brother's books under my brother's lamp. His face was composed
and occupied, but his nose-tip still had the air of being the most mobile
part of his face, as if it had just turned from left to right like
an elephant's proboscis. I had thought him poisonous enough while
he was pursuing and watching me; but I think his unconsciousness
of my presence was more frightful still. "I think I screamed loud and long; but that doesn't matter. What I did next does matter:  I gave him all the money I had,
including a good deal in paper which, though it was mine, I dare say
I had no right to touch. He went off at last, with hateful,
tactful regrets all in long words; and I sat down, feeling ruined
in every sense. And yet I was saved that very night by a pure accident. Arthur had gone off suddenly to London, as he so often did, for bargains;
and returned, late but radiant, having nearly secured a treasure
that was an added splendour even to the family Collection. He was so resplendent that I was almost emboldened to confess
the abstraction of the lesser gem--, but he bore down all other topics
with his over-powering projects. Because the bargain might still
misfire any moment, he insisted on my packing at once and going up
with him to lodgings he had already taken in Fulham, to be near
the curio-shop in question. Thus in spite of myself, I fled from my foe
almost in the dead of night--but from Philip also....  My brother
was often at the South Kensington Museum, and, in order to make
some sort of secondary life for myself, I paid for a few lessons
at the Art Schools. I was coming back from them this evening,
when I saw the abomination of desolation walking alive down
the long straight street and the rest is as this gentleman has said. "I've got only one thing to say. I don't deserve to be helped;
and I don't question or complain of my punishment; it is just,
it ought to have happened. But I still question, with bursting brains,
how it can have happened. Am I punished by miracle? or how can anyone but
Philip and myself know I gave him a tiny coin in the middle of the sea?" "It is an extraordinary problem," admitted Flambeau. "Not so extraordinary as the answer," remarked Father Brown
rather gloomily. "Miss Carstairs, will you be at home if we call
at your Fulham place in an hour and a half hence?" The girl looked at him, and then rose and put her gloves on. "Yes," she said, "I'll be there"; and almost instantly left the place. That night the detective and the priest were still talking
of the matter as they drew near the Fulham house, a tenement
strangely mean even for a temporary residence of the Carstairs family. "Of course the superficial, on reflection," said Flambeau,
"would think first of this Australian brother who's been
in trouble before, who's come back so suddenly and who's just the man
to have shabby confederates. But I can't see how he can
come into the thing by any process of thought, unless..."

     "Well?" asked his companion patiently. Flambeau lowered his voice. "Unless the girl's lover comes in,
too, and he would be the blacker villain. The Australian chap
did know that Hawker wanted the coin. But I can't see how on earth
he could know that Hawker had got it, unless Hawker signalled to him
or his representative across the shore." "That is true," assented the priest, with respect. "Have you noted another thing?" went on Flambeau eagerly. "this Hawker hears his love insulted, but doesn't strike till he's got
to the soft sand-hills, where he can be victor in a mere sham-fight. If he'd struck amid rocks and sea, he might have hurt his ally." "That is true again," said Father Brown, nodding. "And now, take it from the start. It lies between few people,
but at least three. You want one person for suicide; two people
for murder; but at least three people for blackmail"

     "Why?" asked the priest softly. "Well, obviously," cried his friend, "there must be one to be exposed;
one to threaten exposure; and one at least whom exposure would horrify." After a long ruminant pause, the priest said:  "You miss a logical step. Three persons are needed as ideas. Only two are needed as agents." "What can you mean?" asked the other. "Why shouldn't a blackmailer," asked Brown, in a low voice,
"threaten his victim with himself? Suppose a wife became
a rigid teetotaller in order to frighten her husband into concealing
his pub-frequenting, and then wrote him blackmailing letters
in another hand, threatening to tell his wife! Why shouldn't it work? Suppose a father forbade a son to gamble and then, following him
in a good disguise, threatened the boy with his own sham
paternal strictness! Suppose--but, here we are, my friend." "My God!" cried Flambeau; "you don't mean--"

     An active figure ran down the steps of the house and showed
under the golden lamplight the unmistakable head that resembled
the Roman coin. "Miss Carstairs," said Hawker without ceremony,
"wouldn't go in till you came." "Well," observed Brown confidently, "don't you think it's
the best thing she can do to stop outside--with you to look after her? You see, I rather guess you have guessed it all yourself." "Yes," said the young man, in an undertone, "I guessed
on the sands and now I know; that was why I let him fall soft." Taking a latchkey from the girl and the coin from Hawker,
Flambeau let himself and his friend into the empty house and passed
into the outer parlour. It was empty of all occupants but one. The man whom Father Brown had seen pass the tavern was standing
against the wall as if at bay; unchanged, save that he had taken off
his black coat and was wearing a brown dressing-gown. "We have come," said Father Brown politely, "to give back
this coin to its owner." And he handed it to the man with the nose. Flambeau's eyes rolled. "Is this man a coin-collector?" he asked. "This man is Mr Arthur Carstairs," said the priest positively,
"and he is a coin-collector of a somewhat singular kind." The man changed colour so horribly that the crooked nose
stood out on his face like a separate and comic thing. He spoke,
nevertheless, with a sort of despairing dignity. "You shall see,
then," he said, "that I have not lost all the family qualities." And he turned suddenly and strode into an inner room, slamming the door. "Stop him!" shouted Father Brown, bounding and half falling
over a chair; and, after a wrench or two, Flambeau had the door open. But it was too late. In dead silence Flambeau strode across
and telephoned for doctor and police. An empty medicine bottle lay on the floor. Across the table
the body of the man in the brown dressing-gown lay amid his burst
and gaping brown-paper parcels; out of which poured and rolled,
not Roman, but very modern English coins. The priest held up the bronze head of Caesar. "This," he said,
"was all that was left of the Carstairs Collection." After a silence he went on, with more than common gentleness:
"It was a cruel will his wicked father made, and you see he did
resent it a little. He hated the Roman money he had, and grew fonder
of the real money denied him. He not only sold the Collection
bit by bit, but sank bit by bit to the basest ways of making money--
even to blackmailing his own family in a disguise. He blackmailed
his brother from Australia for his little forgotten crime (that is why
he took the cab to Wagga Wagga in Putney), he blackmailed his sister
for the theft he alone could have noticed. And that, by the way,
is why she had that supernatural guess when he was away on the sand-dunes. Mere figure and gait, however distant, are more likely to remind us
of somebody than a well-made-up face quite close." There was another silence. "Well," growled the detective,
"and so this great numismatist and coin-collector was nothing but
a vulgar miser." "Is there so great a difference?" asked Father Brown, in the same
strange, indulgent tone. "What is there wrong about a miser that is
not often as wrong about a collector? What is wrong, except...
thou shalt not make to thyself any graven image; thou shalt not
bow down to them nor serve them, for I...but we must go and see how
the poor young people are getting on." "I think," said Flambeau, "that in spite of everything,
they are probably getting on very well." VII. The Purple Wig


MR EDWARD NUTT, the industrious editor of the Daily Reformer,
sat at his desk, opening letters and marking proofs to the merry tune
of a typewriter, worked by a vigorous young lady. He was a stoutish, fair man, in his shirt-sleeves; his movements
were resolute, his mouth firm and his tones final; but his round,
rather babyish blue eyes had a bewildered and even wistful look
that rather contradicted all this. Nor indeed was the expression
altogether misleading. It might truly be said of him, as for many
journalists in authority, that his most familiar emotion was one of
continuous fear; fear of libel actions, fear of lost advertisements,
fear of misprints, fear of the sack. His life was a series of distracted compromises between
the proprietor of the paper (and of him), who was a senile soap-boiler
with three ineradicable mistakes in his mind, and the very able staff
he had collected to run the paper; some of whom were brilliant
and experienced men and (what was even worse) sincere enthusiasts
for the political policy of the paper. A letter from one of these lay immediately before him,
and rapid and resolute as he was, he seemed almost to hesitate
before opening it. He took up a strip of proof instead, ran down it
with a blue eye, and a blue pencil, altered the word "adultery"
to the word "impropriety," and the word "Jew" to the word "Alien,"
rang a bell and sent it flying upstairs. Then, with a more thoughtful eye, he ripped open the letter from his
more distinguished contributor, which bore a postmark of Devonshire,
and read as follows:

     DEAR NUTT,--As I see you're working Spooks and Dooks at the same time,
what about an article on that rum business of the Eyres of Exmoor;
or as the old women call it down here, the Devil's Ear of Eyre? The head of the family, you know, is the Duke of Exmoor; he is one of
the few really stiff old Tory aristocrats left, a sound old crusted tyrant
it is quite in our line to make trouble about. And I think I'm
on the track of a story that will make trouble. Of course I don't believe in the old legend about James I;
and as for you, you don't believe in anything, not even in journalism. The legend, you'll probably remember, was about the blackest business
in English history--the poisoning of Overbury by that witch's cat
Frances Howard, and the quite mysterious terror which forced the King
to pardon the murderers. There was a lot of alleged witchcraft
mixed up with it; and the story goes that a man-servant listening
at the keyhole heard the truth in a talk between the King and Carr;
and the bodily ear with which he heard grew large and monstrous
as by magic, so awful was the secret. And though he had to be loaded
with lands and gold and made an ancestor of dukes, the elf-shaped ear
is still recurrent in the family. Well, you don't believe in black magic;
and if you did, you couldn't use it for copy. If a miracle happened
in your office, you'd have to hush it up, now so many bishops
are agnostics. But that is not the point The point is that
there really is something queer about Exmoor and his family;
something quite natural, I dare say, but quite abnormal. And the Ear is in it somehow, I fancy; either a symbol or a delusion
or disease or something. Another tradition says that Cavaliers
just after James I began to wear their hair long only to cover
the ear of the first Lord Exmoor. This also is no doubt fanciful. The reason I point it out to you is this:  It seems to me that
we make a mistake in attacking aristocracy entirely for its champagne
and diamonds. Most men rather admire the nobs for having a good time,
but I think we surrender too much when we admit that aristocracy
has made even the aristocrats happy. I suggest a series of articles
pointing out how dreary, how inhuman, how downright diabolist,
is the very smell and atmosphere of some of these great houses. There are plenty of instances; but you couldn't begin with a better one
than the Ear of the Eyres. By the end of the week I think I can
get you the truth about it.--Yours ever, FRANCIS FINN. Mr Nutt reflected a moment, staring at his left boot;
then he called out in a strong, loud and entirely lifeless voice,
in which every syllable sounded alike:  "Miss Barlow, take down
a letter to Mr Finn, please." DEAR FINN,--I think it would do; copy should reach us second post
Saturday.--Yours, E. NUTT. This elaborate epistle he articulated as if it were all one word;
and Miss Barlow rattled it down as if it were all one word. Then he took up another strip of proof and a blue pencil,
and altered the word "supernatural" to the word "marvellous",
and the expression "shoot down" to the expression "repress". In such happy, healthful activities did Mr Nutt disport himself,
until the ensuing Saturday found him at the same desk, dictating to
the same typist, and using the same blue pencil on the first instalment
of Mr Finn's revelations. The opening was a sound piece of slashing
invective about the evil secrets of princes, and despair in the high places
of the earth. Though written violently, it was in excellent English;
but the editor, as usual, had given to somebody else the task
of breaking it up into sub-headings, which were of a spicier sort,
as "Peeress and Poisons", and "The Eerie Ear", "The Eyres in their Eyrie",
and so on through a hundred happy changes. Then followed the legend
of the Ear, amplified from Finn's first letter, and then the substance
of his later discoveries, as follows:


     I know it is the practice of journalists to put the end of the story
at the beginning and call it a headline. I know that journalism
largely consists in saying "Lord Jones Dead" to people who never knew
that Lord Jones was alive. Your present correspondent thinks that this,
like many other journalistic customs, is bad journalism; and that
the Daily Reformer has to set a better example in such things. He proposes to tell his story as it occurred, step by step. He will use the real names of the parties, who in most cases are ready
to confirm his testimony. As for the headlines, the sensational
proclamations--they will come at the end. I was walking along a public path that threads through
a private Devonshire orchard and seems to point towards Devonshire cider,
when I came suddenly upon just such a place as the path suggested. It was a long, low inn, consisting really of a cottage and two barns;
thatched all over with the thatch that looks like brown and grey hair
grown before history. But outside the door was a sign which
called it the Blue Dragon; and under the sign was one of those long
rustic tables that used to stand outside most of the free English inns,
before teetotallers and brewers between them destroyed freedom. And at this table sat three gentlemen, who might have lived
a hundred years ago. Now that I know them all better, there is no difficulty
about disentangling the impressions; but just then they looked like
three very solid ghosts. The dominant figure, both because he was
bigger in all three dimensions, and because he sat centrally
in the length of the table, facing me, was a tall, fat man dressed
completely in black, with a rubicund, even apoplectic visage,
but a rather bald and rather bothered brow. Looking at him again,
more strictly, I could not exactly say what it was that gave me
the sense of antiquity, except the antique cut of his white
clerical necktie and the barred wrinkles across his brow. It was even less easy to fix the impression in the case of
the man at the right end of the table, who, to say truth,
was as commonplace a person as could be seen anywhere, with a round,
brown-haired head and a round snub nose, but also clad in clerical black,
of a stricter cut. It was only when I saw his broad curved hat lying
on the table beside him that I realized why I connected him with
anything ancient. He was a Roman Catholic priest. Perhaps the third man, at the other end of the table,
had really more to do with it than the rest, though he was both
slighter in physical presence and more inconsiderate in his dress. His lank limbs were clad, I might also say clutched, in very tight
grey sleeves and pantaloons; he had a long, sallow, aquiline face
which seemed somehow all the more saturnine because his lantern jaws
were imprisoned in his collar and neck-cloth more in the style of
the old stock; and his hair (which ought to have been dark brown)
was of an odd dim, russet colour which, in conjunction with
his yellow face, looked rather purple than red. The unobtrusive
yet unusual colour was all the more notable because his hair was
almost unnaturally healthy and curling, and he wore it full. But, after all analysis, I incline to think that what gave me
my first old-fashioned impression was simply a set of tall,
old-fashioned wine-glasses, one or two lemons and two churchwarden pipes. And also, perhaps, the old-world errand on which I had come. Being a hardened reporter, and it being apparently a public inn,
I did not need to summon much of my impudence to sit down at
the long table and order some cider. The big man in black seemed
very learned, especially about local antiquities; the small man in black,
though he talked much less, surprised me with a yet wider culture. So we got on very well together; but the third man, the old gentleman
in the tight pantaloons, seemed rather distant and haughty,
until I slid into the subject of the Duke of Exmoor and his ancestry. I thought the subject seemed to embarrass the other two a little;
but it broke the spell of the third man's silence most successfully. Speaking with restraint and with the accent of a highly educated gentleman,
and puffing at intervals at his long churchwarden pipe, he proceeded
to tell me some of the most horrible stories I have ever heard in my life:
how one of the Eyres in the former ages had hanged his own father;
and another had his wife scourged at the cart tail through the village;
and another had set fire to a church full of children, and so on. Some of the tales, indeed, are not fit for public print--,
such as the story of the Scarlet Nuns, the abominable story of
the Spotted Dog, or the thing that was done in the quarry. And all this red roll of impieties came from his thin, genteel lips
rather primly than otherwise, as he sat sipping the wine out of
his tall, thin glass. I could see that the big man opposite me was trying,
if anything, to stop him; but he evidently held the old gentleman
in considerable respect, and could not venture to do so at all abruptly. And the little priest at the other end of the-table, though free from
any such air of embarrassment, looked steadily at the table,
and seemed to listen to the recital with great pain--as well as he might. "You don't seem," I said to the narrator, "to be very fond of
the Exmoor pedigree." He looked at me a moment, his lips still prim, but whitening
and tightening; then he deliberately broke his long pipe and glass
on the table and stood up, the very picture of a perfect gentleman
with the framing temper of a fiend. "These gentlemen," he said, "will tell you whether I have cause
to like it. The curse of the Eyres of old has lain heavy on this country,
and many have suffered from it. They know there are none who have
suffered from it as I have." And with that he crushed a piece of
the fallen glass under his heel, and strode away among the green twilight
of the twinkling apple-trees. "That is an extraordinary old gentleman," I said to the other two;
"do you happen to know what the Exmoor family has done to him? Who is he?" The big man in black was staring at me with the wild air of
a baffled bull; he did not at first seem to take it in. Then he said
at last, "Don't you know who he is?" I reaffirmed my ignorance, and there was another silence;
then the little priest said, still looking at the table, "That is
the Duke of Exmoor." Then, before I could collect my scattered senses, he added
equally quietly, but with an air of regularizing things:
"My friend here is Doctor Mull, the Duke's librarian. My name is Brown." "But," I stammered, "if that is the Duke, why does he damn all
the old dukes like that?" "He seems really to believe," answered the priest called Brown,
"that they have left a curse on him." Then he added, with some irrelevance,
"That's why he wears a wig." It was a few moments before his meaning dawned on me. "You don't mean that fable about the fantastic ear?" I demanded. "I've heard of it, of course, but surely it must be a superstitious yarn
spun out of something much simpler. I've sometimes thought it was
a wild version of one of those mutilation stories. They used to crop
criminals' ears in the sixteenth century." "I hardly think it was that," answered the little man thoughtfully,
"but it is not outside ordinary science or natural law for a family
to have some deformity frequently reappearing--such as one ear bigger
than the other." The big librarian had buried his big bald brow in his big red hands,
like a man trying to think out his duty. "No," he groaned. "You do the man a wrong after all. Understand, I've no reason
to defend him, or even keep faith with him. He has been a tyrant to me
as to everybody else. Don't fancy because you see him sitting here
that he isn't a great lord in the worst sense of the word. He would fetch a man a mile to ring a bell a yard off--if it would
summon another man three miles to fetch a matchbox three yards off. He must have a footman to carry his walking-stick; a body servant
to hold up his opera-glasses--"

     "But not a valet to brush his clothes," cut in the priest,
with a curious dryness, "for the valet would want to brush his wig, too." The librarian turned to him and seemed to forget my presence;
he was strongly moved and, I think, a little heated with wine. "I don't know how you know it, Father Brown," he said, "but you are right. He lets the whole world do everything for him--except dress him. And that he insists on doing in a literal solitude like a desert. Anybody is kicked out of the house without a character who is
so much as found near his dressing-room door.,

     "He seems a pleasant old party," I remarked. "No," replied Dr Mull quite simply; "and yet that is just what
I mean by saying you are unjust to him after all. Gentlemen, the Duke
does really feel the bitterness about the curse that he uttered just now. He does, with sincere shame and terror, hide under that purple wig
something he thinks it would blast the sons of man to see. I know it is so; and I know it is not a mere natural disfigurement,
like a criminal mutilation, or a hereditary disproportion in the features. I know it is worse than that; because a man told me who was present
at a scene that no man could invent, where a stronger man than
any of us tried to defy the secret, and was scared away from it." I opened my mouth to speak, but Mull went on in oblivion of me,
speaking out of the cavern of his hands. "I don't mind telling you,
Father, because it's really more defending the poor Duke than
giving him away. Didn't you ever hear of the time when he
very nearly lost all the estates?" The priest shook his head; and the librarian proceeded to
tell the tale as he had heard it from his predecessor in the same post,
who had been his patron and instructor, and whom he seemed to trust
implicitly. Up to a certain point it was a common enough tale
of the decline of a great family's fortunes--the tale of a family lawyer. His lawyer, however, had the sense to cheat honestly, if the expression
explains itself. Instead of using funds he held in trust,
he took advantage of the Duke's carelessness to put the family in
a financial hole, in which it might be necessary for the Duke to
let him hold them in reality. The lawyer's name was Isaac Green, but the Duke always called him
Elisha; presumably in reference to the fact that he was quite bald,
though certainly not more than thirty. He had risen very rapidly,
but from very dirty beginnings; being first a "nark" or informer,
and then a money-lender:  but as solicitor to the Eyres he had the sense,
as I say, to keep technically straight until he was ready to deal
the final blow. The blow fell at dinner; and the old librarian said
he should never forget the very look of the lampshades and the decanters,
as the little lawyer, with a steady smile, proposed to the great landlord
that they should halve the estates between them. The sequel certainly
could not be overlooked; for the Duke, in dead silence, smashed
a decanter on the man's bald head as suddenly as I had seen him smash
the glass that day in the orchard. It left a red triangular scar
on the scalp, and the lawyer's eyes altered, but not his smile. He rose tottering to his feet, and struck back as such men do strike. "I am glad of that," he said, "for now I can take the whole estate. The law will give it to me." Exmoor, it seems, was white as ashes, but his eyes still blazed. "The law will give it you," he said; "but you will not take it....
Why not? Why? because it would mean the crack of doom for me,
and if you take it I shall take off my wig....  Why, you pitiful
plucked fowl, anyone can see your bare head. But no man shall
see mine and live." Well, you may say what you like and make it mean what you like. But Mull swears it is the solemn fact that the lawyer, after shaking
his knotted fists in the air for an instant, simply ran from the room
and never reappeared in the countryside; and since then Exmoor has been
feared more for a warlock than even for a landlord and a magistrate. Now Dr Mull told his story with rather wild theatrical gestures,
and with a passion I think at least partisan. I was quite conscious
of the possibility that the whole was the extravagance of
an old braggart and gossip. But before I end this half of my discoveries,
I think it due to Dr Mull to record that my two first inquiries
have confirmed his story. I learned from an old apothecary in the village
that there was a bald man in evening dress, giving the name of Green,
who came to him one night to have a three-cornered cut on his forehead
plastered. And I learnt from the legal records and old newspapers
that there was a lawsuit threatened, and at least begun, by one Green
against the Duke of Exmoor. Mr Nutt, of the Daily Reformer, wrote some highly incongruous
words across the top of the copy, made some highly mysterious marks
down the side of it, and called to Miss Barlow in the same loud,
monotonous voice:  "Take down a letter to Mr Finn." DEAR FINN,--Your copy will do, but I have had to headline it a bit;
and our public would never stand a Romanist priest in the story--
you must keep your eye on the suburbs. I've altered him to Mr Brown,
a Spiritualist. Yours,

                                                  E.  NUTT. A day or two afterward found the active and judicious editor
examining, with blue eyes that seemed to grow rounder and rounder,
the second instalment of Mr Finn's tale of mysteries in high life. It began with the words:


     I have made an astounding discovery. I freely confess it is
quite different from anything I expected to discover, and will give
a much more practical shock to the public. I venture to say,
without any vanity, that the words I now write will be read all over Europe,
and certainly all over America and the Colonies. And yet I heard
all I have to tell before I left this same little wooden table in this
same little wood of apple-trees. I owe it all to the small priest Brown; he is an extraordinary man. The big librarian had left the table, perhaps ashamed of his long tongue,
perhaps anxious about the storm in which his mysterious master
had vanished:  anyway, he betook himself heavily in the Duke's tracks
through the trees. Father Brown had picked up one of the lemons and
was eyeing it with an odd pleasure. "What a lovely colour a lemon is!" he said. "There's one thing
I don't like about the Duke's wig--the colour." "I don't think I understand," I answered. "I dare say he's got good reason to cover his ears, like King Midas,"
went on the priest, with a cheerful simplicity which somehow seemed
rather flippant under the circumstances. "I can quite understand
that it's nicer to cover them with hair than with brass plates or
leather flaps. But if he wants to use hair, why doesn't he make it
look like hair? There never was hair of that colour in this world. It looks more like a sunset-cloud coming through the wood. Why doesn't he conceal the family curse better, if he's really
so ashamed of it? Shall I tell you? It's because he isn't ashamed of it. He's proud of it"

     "It's an ugly wig to be proud of--and an ugly story," I said. "Consider," replied this curious little man, "how you yourself
really feel about such things. I don't suggest you're either
more snobbish or more morbid than the rest of us:  but don't you feel
in a vague way that a genuine old family curse is rather a fine thing
to have? Would you be ashamed, wouldn't you be a little proud,
if the heir of the Glamis horror called you his friend? or if Byron's
family had confided, to you only, the evil adventures of their race? Don't be too hard on the aristocrats themselves if their heads are
as weak as ours would be, and they are snobs about their own sorrows." "By Jove!" I cried; "and that's true enough. My own mother's family
had a banshee; and, now I come to think of it, it has comforted me
in many a cold hour." "And think," he went on, "of that stream of blood and poison
that spurted from his thin lips the instant you so much as mentioned
his ancestors. Why should he show every stranger over such
a Chamber of Horrors unless he is proud of it? He doesn't conceal his wig,
he doesn't conceal his blood, he doesn't conceal his family curse,
he doesn't conceal the family crimes--but--"

     The little man's voice changed so suddenly, he shut his hand
so sharply, and his eyes so rapidly grew rounder and brighter
like a waking owl's, that it had all the abruptness of a small explosion
on the table. "But," he ended, "he does really conceal his toilet." It somehow completed the thrill of my fanciful nerves that
at that instant the Duke appeared again silently among the glimmering trees,
with his soft foot and sunset-hued hair, coming round the corner of
the house in company with his librarian. Before he came within earshot,
Father Brown had added quite composedly, "Why does he really hide
the secret of what he does with the purple wig? Because it isn't
the sort of secret we suppose." The Duke came round the corner and resumed his seat at the head
of the table with all his native dignity. The embarrassment of
the librarian left him hovering on his hind legs, like a huge bear. The Duke addressed the priest with great seriousness. "Father Brown,"
he said, "Doctor Mull informs me that you have come here to make a request. I no longer profess an observance of the religion of my fathers;
but for their sakes, and for the sake of the days when we met before,
I am very willing to hear you. But I presume you would rather
be heard in private." Whatever I retain of the gentleman made me stand up. Whatever I have attained of the journalist made me stand still. Before this paralysis could pass, the priest had made a momentarily
detaining motion. "If," he said, "your Grace will permit me
my real petition, or if I retain any right to advise you, I would urge
that as many people as possible should be present. All over this country
I have found hundreds, even of my own faith and flock, whose imaginations
are poisoned by the spell which I implore you to break. I wish we could
have all Devonshire here to see you do it." "To see me do what?" asked the Duke, arching his eyebrows. "To see you take off your wig," said Father Brown. The Duke's face did not move; but he looked at his petitioner
with a glassy stare which was the most awful expression I have ever seen
on a human face. I could see the librarian's great legs wavering
under him like the shadows of stems in a pool; and I could not banish
from my own brain the fancy that the trees all around us were
filling softly in the silence with devils instead of birds. "I spare you," said the Duke in a voice of inhuman pity. "I refuse. If I gave you the faintest hint of the load of horror
I have to bear alone, you would lie shrieking at these feet of mine
and begging to know no more. I will spare you the hint. You shall not spell the first letter of what is written on
the altar of the Unknown God." "I know the Unknown God," said the little priest, with an
unconscious grandeur of certitude that stood up like a granite tower. "I know his name; it is Satan. The true God was made flesh
and dwelt among us. And I say to you, wherever you find men ruled
merely by mystery, it is the mystery of iniquity. If the devil
tells you something is too fearful to look at, look at it. If he says something is too terrible to hear, hear it. If you think
some truth unbearable, bear it. I entreat your Grace to end
this nightmare now and here at this table." "If I did," said the Duke in a low voice, "you and all you believe,
and all by which alone you live, would be the first to shrivel and perish. You would have an instant to know the great Nothing before you died." "The Cross of Christ be between me and harm," said Father Brown. "Take off your wig." I was leaning over the table in ungovernable excitement;
in listening to this extraordinary duel half a thought had
come into my head. "Your Grace," I cried, "I call your bluff. Take off that wig or I will knock it off." I suppose I can be prosecuted for assault, but I am very glad
I did it. When he said, in the same voice of stone, "I refuse,"
I simply sprang on him. For three long instants he strained against me
as if he had all hell to help him; but I forced his head until
the hairy cap fell off it. I admit that, whilst wrestling,
I shut my eyes as it fell. I was awakened by a cry from Mull, who was also by this time
at the Duke's side. His head and mine were both bending over
the bald head of the wigless Duke. Then the silence was snapped
by the librarian exclaiming:  "What can it mean? Why, the man had
nothing to hide. His ears are just like everybody else's." "Yes," said Father Brown, "that is what he had to hide." The priest walked straight up to him, but strangely enough
did not even glance at his ears. He stared with an almost comical
seriousness at his bald forehead, and pointed to a three-cornered
cicatrice, long healed, but still discernible. "Mr Green, I think." he said politely, "and he did get the whole estate after all." And now let me tell the readers of the Daily Reformer
what I think the most remarkable thing in the whole affair. This transformation scene, which will seem to you as wild and purple
as a Persian fairy-tale, has been (except for my technical assault)
strictly legal and constitutional from its first beginnings. This man with the odd scar and the ordinary ears is not an impostor. Though (in one sense) he wears another man's wig and claims
another man's ear, he has not stolen another man's coronet. He really is the one and only Duke of Exmoor. What happened was this. The old Duke really had a slight malformation of the ear, which really
was more or less hereditary. He really was morbid about it;
and it is likely enough that he did invoke it as a kind of curse
in the violent scene (which undoubtedly happened) in which he struck
Green with the decanter. But the contest ended very differently. Green pressed his claim and got the estates; the dispossessed nobleman
shot himself and died without issue. After a decent interval
the beautiful English Government revived the "extinct" peerage of Exmoor,
and bestowed it, as is usual, on the most important person,
the person who had got the property. This man used the old feudal fables--properly, in his snobbish soul,
really envied and admired them. So that thousands of poor English people
trembled before a mysterious chieftain with an ancient destiny and
a diadem of evil stars--when they are really trembling before
a guttersnipe who was a pettifogger and a pawnbroker not twelve years ago. I think it very typical of the real case against our aristocracy as it is,
and as it will be till God sends us braver men. Mr Nutt put down the manuscript and called out with unusual
sharpness:  "Miss Barlow, please take down a letter to Mr Finn." DEAR FINN,--You must be mad; we can't touch this. I wanted vampires
and the bad old days and aristocracy hand-in-hand with superstition. They like that But you must know the Exmoors would never forgive this. And what would our people say then, I should like to know! Why, Sir Simon
is one of Exmoor's greatest pals; and it would ruin that cousin of
the Eyres that's standing for us at Bradford. Besides, old Soap-Suds
was sick enough at not getting his peerage last year; he'd sack me by wire
if I lost him it with such lunacy as this. And what about Duffey? He's doing us some rattling articles on "The Heel of the Norman." And how can he write about Normans if the man's only a solicitor? Do be reasonable.--Yours, E. NUTT. As Miss Barlow rattled away cheerfully, he crumpled up the copy
and tossed it into the waste-paper basket; but not before he had,
automatically and by force of habit, altered the word "God"
to the word "circumstances." VIII. The Perishing of the Pendragons


FATHER BROWN was in no mood for adventures. He had lately fallen ill
with over-work, and when he began to recover, his friend Flambeau
had taken him on a cruise in a small yacht with Sir Cecil Fanshaw,
a young Cornish squire and an enthusiast for Cornish coast scenery. But Brown was still rather weak; he was no very happy sailor;
and though he was never of the sort that either grumbles or breaks down,
his spirits did not rise above patience and civility. When the other
two men praised the ragged violet sunset or the ragged volcanic crags,
he agreed with them. When Flambeau pointed out a rock shaped
like a dragon, he looked at it and thought it very like a dragon. When Fanshaw more excitedly indicated a rock that was like Merlin,
he looked at it, and signified assent. When Flambeau asked whether
this rocky gate of the twisted river was not the gate of Fairyland,
he said "Yes." He heard the most important things and the most trivial
with the same tasteless absorption. He heard that the coast was death
to all but careful seamen; he also heard that the ship's cat was asleep. He heard that Fanshaw couldn't find his cigar-holder anywhere;
he also heard the pilot deliver the oracle "Both eyes bright,
she's all right; one eye winks, down she sinks." He heard Flambeau
say to Fanshaw that no doubt this meant the pilot must keep both eyes
open and be spry. And he heard Fanshaw say to Flambeau that,
oddly enough, it didn't mean this:  it meant that while they
saw two of the coast lights, one near and the other distant,
exactly side by side, they were in the right river-channel;
but that if one light was hidden behind the other, they were going
on the rocks. He heard Fanshaw add that his country was full of
such quaint fables and idioms; it was the very home of romance;
he even pitted this part of Cornwall against Devonshire, as a claimant
to the laurels of Elizabethan seamanship. According to him
there had been captains among these coves and islets compared with whom
Drake was practically a landsman. He heard Flambeau laugh, and ask if,
perhaps, the adventurous title of "Westward Ho!" only meant that
all Devonshire men wished they were living in Cornwall. He heard Fanshaw
say there was no need to be silly; that not only had Cornish captains
been heroes, but that they were heroes still:  that near that very spot
there was an old admiral, now retired, who was scarred by thrilling voyages
full of adventures; and who had in his youth found the last group
of eight Pacific Islands that was added to the chart of the world. This Cecil Fanshaw was, in person, of the kind that commonly urges
such crude but pleasing enthusiasms; a very young man, light-haired,
high-coloured, with an eager profile; with a boyish bravado of spirits,
but an almost girlish delicacy of tint and type. The big shoulders,
black brows and black mousquetaire swagger of Flambeau
were a great contrast. All these trivialities Brown heard and saw; but heard them
as a tired man hears a tune in the railway wheels, or saw them
as a sick man sees the pattern of his wall-paper. No one can calculate
the turns of mood in convalescence:  but Father Brown's depression
must have had a great deal to do with his mere unfamiliarity with the sea. For as the river mouth narrowed like the neck of a bottle,
and the water grew calmer and the air warmer and more earthly,
he seemed to wake up and take notice like a baby. They had reached
that phase just after sunset when air and water both look bright,
but earth and all its growing things look almost black by comparison. About this particular  evening, however, there was something exceptional. It was one of those rare atmospheres in which a smoked-glass slide
seems to have been slid away from between us and Nature; so that even
dark colours on that day look more gorgeous than bright colours
on cloudier days. The trampled earth of the river-banks and
the peaty stain in the pools did not look drab but glowing umber,
and the dark woods astir in the breeze did not look, as usual, dim blue
with mere depth of distance, but more like wind-tumbled masses of some
vivid violet blossom. This magic clearness and intensity in the colours
was further forced on Brown's slowly reviving senses by something
romantic and even secret in the very form of the landscape. The river was still well wide and deep enough for a pleasure boat
so small as theirs; but the curves of the country-side suggested
that it was closing in on either hand; the woods seemed to be making
broken and flying attempts at bridge-building--as if the boat
were passing from the romance of a valley to the romance of a hollow
and so to the supreme romance of a tunnel. Beyond this mere
look of things there was little for Brown's freshening fancy to feed on;
he saw no human beings, except some gipsies trailing along the river bank,
with faggots and osiers cut in the forest; and one sight
no longer unconventional, but in such remote parts still uncommon:
a dark-haired lady, bare-headed, and paddling her own canoe. If Father Brown ever attached any importance to either of these,
he certainly forgot them at the next turn of the river which
brought in sight a singular object. The water seemed to widen and split, being cloven by the dark wedge
of a fish-shaped and wooded islet. With the rate at which they went,
the islet seemed to swim towards them like a ship; a ship with
a very high prow--or, to speak more strictly, a very high funnel. For at the extreme point nearest them stood up an odd-looking building,
unlike anything they could remember or connect with any purpose. It was not specially high, but it was too high for its breadth
to be called anything but a tower. Yet it appeared to be built
entirely of wood, and that in a most unequal and eccentric way. Some of the planks and beams were of good, seasoned oak; some of
such wood cut raw and recent; some again of white pinewood,
and a great deal more of the same sort of wood painted black with tar. These black beams were set crooked or crisscross at all kinds of angles,
giving the whole a most patchy and puzzling appearance. There were one or two windows, which appeared to be coloured and
leaded in an old-fashioned but more elaborate style. The travellers
looked at it with that paradoxical feeling we have when something
reminds us of something, and yet we are certain it is something
very different. Father Brown, even when he was mystified, was clever in analysing
his own mystification. And he found himself reflecting that
the oddity seemed to consist in a particular shape cut out in
an incongruous material; as if one saw a top-hat made of tin,
or a frock-coat cut out of tartan. He was sure he had seen timbers
of different tints arranged like that somewhere, but never
in such architectural proportions. The next moment a glimpse
through the dark trees told him all he wanted to know and he laughed. Through a gap in the foliage there appeared for a moment one of those
old wooden houses, faced with black beams, which are still to be found
here and there in England, but which most of us see imitated
in some show called "Old London" or "Shakespeare's England'. It was in view only long enough for the priest to see that,
however old-fashioned, it was a comfortable and well-kept country-house,
with flower-beds in front of it. It had none of the piebald and crazy
look of the tower that seemed made out of its refuse. "What on earth's this?" said Flambeau, who was still staring
at the tower. Fanshaw's eyes were shining, and he spoke triumphantly. "Aha! you've not seen a place quite like this before, I fancy;
that's why I've brought you here, my friend. Now you shall see
whether I exaggerate about the mariners of Cornwall. This place belongs
to Old Pendragon, whom we call the Admiral; though he retired
before getting the rank. The spirit of Raleigh and Hawkins is a memory
with the Devon folk; it's a modern fact with the Pendragons. If Queen Elizabeth were to rise from the grave and come up this river
in a gilded barge, she would be received by the Admiral in a house
exactly such as she was accustomed to, in every corner and casement,
in every panel on the wall or plate on the table. And she would find
an English Captain still talking fiercely of fresh lands to be found
in little ships, as much as if she had dined with Drake." "She'd find a rum sort of thing in the garden," said Father Brown,
"which would not please her Renaissance eye. That Elizabethan domestic
architecture is charming in its way; but it's against the very nature
of it to break out into turrets." "And yet," answered Fanshaw, "that's the most romantic and
Elizabethan part of the business. It was built by the Pendragons
in the very days of the Spanish wars; and though it's needed patching
and even rebuilding for another reason, it's always been rebuilt
in the old way. The story goes that the lady of Sir Peter Pendragon
built it in this place and to this height, because from the top
you can just see the corner where vessels turn into the river mouth;
and she wished to be the first to see her husband's ship,
as he sailed home from the Spanish Main." "For what other reason," asked Father Brown, "do you mean that
it has been rebuilt?" "Oh, there's a strange story about that, too," said the young squire
with relish. "You are really in a land of strange stories. King Arthur was here and Merlin and the fairies before him. The story goes that Sir Peter Pendragon, who (I fear) had some of
the faults of the pirates as well as the virtues of the sailor,
was bringing home three Spanish gentlemen in honourable captivity,
intending to escort them to Elizabeth's court. But he was a man
of flaming and tigerish temper, and coming to high words with one of them,
he caught him by the throat and flung him by accident or design,
into the sea. A second Spaniard, who was the brother of the first,
instantly drew his sword and flew at Pendragon, and after a short but
furious combat in which both got three wounds in as many minutes,
Pendragon drove his blade through the other's body and the second Spaniard
was accounted for. As it happened the ship had already turned
into the river mouth and was close to comparatively shallow water. The third Spaniard sprang over the side of the ship, struck out
for the shore, and was soon near enough to it to stand up to his waist
in water. And turning again to face the ship, and holding up both
arms to Heaven--like a prophet calling plagues upon a wicked city--
he called out to Pendragon in a piercing and terrible voice,
that he at least was yet living, that he would go on living,
that he would live for ever; and that generation after generation
the house of Pendragon should never see him or his, but should know
by very certain signs that he and his vengeance were alive. With that he dived under the wave, and was either drowned or swam
so long under water that no hair of his head was seen afterwards." "There's that girl in the canoe again," said Flambeau irrelevantly,
for good-looking young women would call him off any topic. "She seems bothered by the queer tower just as we were." Indeed, the black-haired young lady was letting her canoe float
slowly and silently past the strange islet; and was looking intently up
at the strange tower, with a strong glow of curiosity on her oval
and olive face. "Never mind girls," said Fanshaw impatiently, "there are plenty
of them in the world, but not many things like the Pendragon Tower. As you may easily suppose, plenty of superstitions and scandals
have followed in the track of the Spaniard's curse; and no doubt,
as you would put it, any accident happening to this Cornish family
would be connected with it by rural credulity. But it is perfectly true
that this tower has been burnt down two or three times; and the family
can't be called lucky, for more than two, I think, of the Admiral's
near kin have perished by shipwreck; and one at least, to my own knowledge,
on practically the same spot where Sir Peter threw the Spaniard overboard." "What a pity!" exclaimed Flambeau. "She's going." "When did your friend the Admiral tell you this family history?" asked Father Brown, as the girl in the canoe paddled off,
without showing the least intention of extending her interest from
the tower to the yacht, which Fanshaw had already caused to lie
alongside the island. "Many years ago," replied Fanshaw; "he hasn't been to sea for
some time now, though he is as keen on it as ever. I believe there's
a family compact or something. Well, here's the landing stage;
let's come ashore and see the old boy." They followed him on to the island, just under the tower,
and Father Brown, whether from the mere touch of dry land, or the interest
of something on the other bank of the river (which he stared at
very hard for some seconds), seemed singularly improved in briskness. They entered a wooded avenue between two fences of thin greyish wood,
such as often enclose parks or gardens, and over the top of which
the dark trees tossed to and fro like black and purple plumes upon
the hearse of a giant. The tower, as they left it behind,
looked all the quainter, because such entrances are usually flanked
by two towers; and this one looked lopsided. But for this, the avenue
had the usual appearance of the entrance to a gentleman's grounds;
and, being so curved that the house was now out of sight,
somehow looked a much larger park than any plantation on such an island
could really be. Father Brown was, perhaps, a little fanciful
in his fatigue, but he almost thought the whole place must be
growing larger, as things do in a nightmare. Anyhow, a mystical monotony
was the only character of their march, until Fanshaw suddenly stopped,
and pointed to something sticking out through the grey fence--
something that looked at first rather like the imprisoned horn
of some beast. Closer observation showed that it was
a slightly curved blade of metal that shone faintly in the fading light. Flambeau, who like all Frenchmen had been a soldier, bent over it
and said in a startled voice:  "Why, it's a sabre! I believe
I know the sort, heavy and curved, but shorter than the cavalry;
they used to have them in artillery and the--"

     As he spoke the blade plucked itself out of the crack it had made
and came down again with a more ponderous slash, splitting
the fissiparous fence to the bottom with a rending noise. Then it was pulled out again, flashed above the fence some feet
further along, and again split it halfway down with the first stroke;
and after waggling a little to extricate itself (accompanied with
curses in the darkness) split it down to the ground with a second. Then a kick of devilish energy sent the whole loosened square
of thin wood flying into the pathway, and a great gap of dark coppice
gaped in the paling. Fanshaw peered into the dark opening and uttered an exclamation
of astonishment. "My dear Admiral!" he exclaimed, "do you--er--
do you generally cut out a new front door whenever you want to
go for a walk?" The voice in the gloom swore again, and then broke into a jolly laugh. "No," it said; "I've really got to cut down this fence somehow;
it's spoiling all the plants, and no one else here can do it. But I'll only carve another bit off the front door, and then come out
and welcome you." And sure enough, he heaved up his weapon once more, and,
hacking twice, brought down another and similar strip of fence,
making the opening about fourteen feet wide in all. Then through this
larger forest gateway he came out into the evening light,
with a chip of grey wood sticking to his sword-blade. He momentarily fulfilled all Fanshaw's fable of an old piratical
Admiral; though the details seemed afterwards to decompose into accidents. For instance, he wore a broad-brimmed hat as protection against the sun;
but the front flap of it was turned up straight to the sky, and the
two corners pulled down lower than the ears, so that it stood across
his forehead in a crescent like the old cocked hat worn by Nelson. He wore an ordinary dark-blue jacket, with nothing special about
the buttons, but the combination of it with white linen trousers
somehow had a sailorish look. He was tall and loose, and walked with
a sort of swagger, which was not a sailor's roll, and yet somehow
suggested it; and he held in his hand a short sabre which was like
a navy cutlass, but about twice as big. Under the bridge of the hat
his eagle face looked eager, all the more because it was not only
clean-shaven, but without eyebrows. It seemed almost as if all
the hair had come off his face from his thrusting it through
a throng of elements. His eyes were prominent and piercing. His colour was curiously attractive, while partly tropical;
it reminded one vaguely of a blood-orange. That is, that while it was
ruddy and sanguine, there was a yellow in it that was in no way sickly,
but seemed rather to glow like gold apples of the Hesperides--
Father Brown thought he had never seen a figure so expressive
of all the romances about the countries of the Sun. When Fanshaw had presented his two friends to their host
he fell again into a tone of rallying the latter about his wreckage
of the fence and his apparent rage of profanity. The Admiral pooh-poohed
it at first as a piece of necessary but annoying garden work;
but at length the ring of real energy came back into his laughter,
and he cried with a mixture of impatience and good humour:

     "Well, perhaps I do go at it a bit rabidly, and feel
a kind of pleasure in smashing anything. So would you if your
only pleasure was in cruising about to find some new Cannibal Islands,
and you had to stick on this muddy little rockery in a sort of rustic pond. When I remember how I've cut down a mile and a half of green poisonous
jungle with an old cutlass half as sharp as this; and then remember
I must stop here and chop this matchwood, because of some confounded
old bargain scribbled in a family Bible, why, I--"

     He swung up the heavy steel again; and this time sundered
the wall of wood from top to bottom at one stroke. "I feel like that," he said laughing, but furiously flinging
the sword some yards down the path, "and now let's go up to the house;
you must have some dinner." The semicircle of lawn in front of the house was varied by
three circular garden beds, one of red tulips, a second of
yellow tulips, and the third of some white, waxen-looking blossoms
that the visitors did not know and presumed to be exotic. A heavy, hairy and rather sullen-looking gardener was hanging up
a heavy coil of garden hose. The corners of the expiring sunset
which seemed to cling about the corners of the house gave glimpses
here and there of the colours of remoter flowerbeds; and in
a treeless space on one side of the house opening upon the river
stood a tall brass tripod on which was tilted a big brass telescope. Just outside the steps of the porch stood a little painted
green garden table, as if someone had just had tea there. The entrance was flanked with two of those half-featured lumps of stone
with holes for eyes that are said to be South Sea idols; and on
the brown oak beam across the doorway were some confused carvings
that looked almost as barbaric. As they passed indoors, the little cleric hopped suddenly
on to the table, and standing on it peered unaffectedly
through his spectacles at the mouldings in the oak. Admiral Pendragon
looked very much astonished, though not particularly annoyed;
while Fanshaw was so amused with what looked like a performing pigmy
on his little stand, that he could not control his laughter. But Father Brown was not likely to notice either the laughter
or the astonishment. He was gazing at three carved symbols, which, though very worn
and obscure, seemed still to convey some sense to him. The first
seemed to be the outline of some tower or other building, crowned with
what looked like curly-pointed ribbons. The second was clearer:
an old Elizabethan galley with decorative waves beneath it,
but interrupted in the middle by a curious jagged rock, which was either
a fault in the wood or some conventional representation of the water
coming in. The third represented the upper half of a human figure,
ending in an escalloped line like the waves; the face was rubbed
and featureless, and both arms were held very stiffly up in the air. "Well," muttered Father Brown, blinking, "here is the legend
of the Spaniard plain enough. Here he is holding up his arms
and cursing in the sea; and here are the two curses:  the wrecked ship
and the burning of Pendragon Tower." Pendragon shook his head with a kind of venerable amusement. "And how many other things might it not be?" he said. "Don't you know
that that sort of half-man, like a half-lion or half-stag,
is quite common in heraldry? Might not that line through the ship
be one of those parti-per-pale lines, indented, I think they call it? And though the third thing isn't so very heraldic, it would be
more heraldic to suppose it a tower crowned with laurel than with fire;
and it looks just as like it." "But it seems rather odd," said Flambeau, "that it should
exactly confirm the old legend." "Ah," replied the sceptical traveller, "but you don't know
how much of the old legend may have been made up from the old figures. Besides, it isn't the only old legend. Fanshaw, here, who is
fond of such things, will tell you there are other versions of the tale,
and much more horrible ones. One story credits my unfortunate ancestor
with having had the Spaniard cut in two; and that will fit
the pretty picture also. Another obligingly credits our family
with the possession of a tower full of snakes and explains those little,
wriggly things in that way. And a third theory supposes the crooked line
on the ship to be a conventionalized thunderbolt; but that alone,
if seriously examined, would show what a very little way these
unhappy coincidences really go." "Why, how do you mean?" asked Fanshaw. "It so happens," replied his host coolly, "that there was
no thunder and lightning at all in the two or three shipwrecks
I know of in our family."