Manners were all that could be safely judged of, under a much longer
knowledge than they had yet had of Mr. Churchill. She believed
every body found his manners pleasing." Emma could not forgive her. CHAPTER III


Emma could not forgive her;--but as neither provocation nor resentment
were discerned by Mr. Knightley, who had been of the party, and had
seen only proper attention and pleasing behaviour on each side,
he was expressing the next morning, being at Hartfield again on
business with Mr. Woodhouse, his approbation of the whole; not so
openly as he might have done had her father been out of the room,
but speaking plain enough to be very intelligible to Emma. He had been used to think her unjust to Jane, and had now great
pleasure in marking an improvement. "A very pleasant evening," he began, as soon as Mr. Woodhouse
had been talked into what was necessary, told that he understood,
and the papers swept away;--"particularly pleasant. You and Miss
Fairfax gave us some very good music. I do not know a more
luxurious state, sir, than sitting at one's ease to be entertained
a whole evening by two such young women; sometimes with music
and sometimes with conversation. I am sure Miss Fairfax must
have found the evening pleasant, Emma. You left nothing undone. I was glad you made her play so much, for having no instrument
at her grandmother's, it must have been a real indulgence." "I am happy you approved," said Emma, smiling; "but I hope I am
not often deficient in what is due to guests at Hartfield." "No, my dear," said her father instantly; "_that_ I am sure you
are not. There is nobody half so attentive and civil as you are. If any thing, you are too attentive. The muffin last night--if it
had been handed round once, I think it would have been enough." "No," said Mr. Knightley, nearly at the same time; "you are not
often deficient; not often deficient either in manner or comprehension. I think you understand me, therefore." An arch look expressed--"I understand you well enough;" but she
said only, "Miss Fairfax is reserved." "I always told you she was--a little; but you will soon overcome
all that part of her reserve which ought to be overcome, all that
has its foundation in diffidence. What arises from discretion
must be honoured." "You think her diffident. I do not see it." "My dear Emma," said he, moving from his chair into one close
by her, "you are not going to tell me, I hope, that you
had not a pleasant evening." "Oh! no; I was pleased with my own perseverance in asking questions;
and amused to think how little information I obtained." "I am disappointed," was his only answer. "I hope every body had a pleasant evening," said Mr. Woodhouse,
in his quiet way. "I had. Once, I felt the fire rather too much;
but then I moved back my chair a little, a very little, and it did
not disturb me. Miss Bates was very chatty and good-humoured,
as she always is, though she speaks rather too quick. However,
she is very agreeable, and Mrs. Bates too, in a different way. I like old friends; and Miss Jane Fairfax is a very pretty sort of
young lady, a very pretty and a very well-behaved young lady indeed. She must have found the evening agreeable, Mr. Knightley, because she
had Emma." "True, sir; and Emma, because she had Miss Fairfax." Emma saw his anxiety, and wishing to appease it, at least for
the present, said, and with a sincerity which no one could question--

"She is a sort of elegant creature that one cannot keep one's eyes from. I am always watching her to admire; and I do pity her from my heart." Mr. Knightley looked as if he were more gratified than he cared
to express; and before he could make any reply, Mr. Woodhouse,
whose thoughts were on the Bates's, said--

"It is a great pity that their circumstances should be so confined! a great pity indeed! and I have often wished--but it is so little one
can venture to do--small, trifling presents, of any thing uncommon--
Now we have killed a porker, and Emma thinks of sending them
a loin or a leg; it is very small and delicate--Hartfield pork is
not like any other pork--but still it is pork--and, my dear Emma,
unless one could be sure of their making it into steaks, nicely fried,
as ours are fried, without the smallest grease, and not roast it,
for no stomach can bear roast pork--I think we had better send the leg--
do not you think so, my dear?" "My dear papa, I sent the whole hind-quarter. I knew you would wish it. There will be the leg to be salted, you know, which is so very nice,
and the loin to be dressed directly in any manner they like." "That's right, my dear, very right. I had not thought of it before,
but that is the best way. They must not over-salt the leg; and then,
if it is not over-salted, and if it is very thoroughly boiled,
just as Serle boils ours, and eaten very moderately of, with a
boiled turnip, and a little carrot or parsnip, I do not consider
it unwholesome." "Emma," said Mr. Knightley presently, "I have a piece of news for you. You like news--and I heard an article in my way hither that I think
will interest you." "News! Oh! yes, I always like news. What is it?--why do you
smile so?--where did you hear it?--at Randalls?" He had time only to say,

"No, not at Randalls; I have not been near Randalls," when the door
was thrown open, and Miss Bates and Miss Fairfax walked into the room. Full of thanks, and full of news, Miss Bates knew not which to
give quickest. Mr. Knightley soon saw that he had lost his moment,
and that not another syllable of communication could rest with him. "Oh! my dear sir, how are you this morning? My dear Miss Woodhouse--
I come quite over-powered. Such a beautiful hind-quarter of pork! You are too bountiful! Have you heard the news? Mr. Elton is going
to be married." Emma had not had time even to think of Mr. Elton, and she was
so completely surprized that she could not avoid a little start,
and a little blush, at the sound. "There is my news:--I thought it would interest you,"
said Mr. Knightley, with a smile which implied a conviction
of some part of what had passed between them. "But where could _you_ hear it?" cried Miss Bates. "Where could
you possibly hear it, Mr. Knightley? For it is not five minutes
since I received Mrs. Cole's note--no, it cannot be more than five--
or at least ten--for I had got my bonnet and spencer on, just ready
to come out--I was only gone down to speak to Patty again about
the pork--Jane was standing in the passage--were not you, Jane?--
for my mother was so afraid that we had not any salting-pan
large enough. So I said I would go down and see, and Jane said,
`Shall I go down instead? for I think you have a little cold,
and Patty has been washing the kitchen.'--`Oh! my dear,'
said I--well, and just then came the note. A Miss Hawkins--
that's all I know. A Miss Hawkins of Bath. But, Mr. Knightley,
how could you possibly have heard it? for the very moment Mr. Cole
told Mrs. Cole of it, she sat down and wrote to me. A Miss Hawkins--"

"I was with Mr. Cole on business an hour and a half ago. He had just read Elton's letter as I was shewn in, and handed it
to me directly." "Well! that is quite--I suppose there never was a piece of news more
generally interesting. My dear sir, you really are too bountiful. My mother desires her very best compliments and regards, and a
thousand thanks, and says you really quite oppress her." "We consider our Hartfield pork," replied Mr. Woodhouse--"indeed it
certainly is, so very superior to all other pork, that Emma and I
cannot have a greater pleasure than--"

"Oh! my dear sir, as my mother says, our friends are only too good
to us. If ever there were people who, without having great wealth
themselves, had every thing they could wish for, I am sure it is us. We may well say that `our lot is cast in a goodly heritage.' Well, Mr. Knightley, and so you actually saw the letter; well--"

"It was short--merely to announce--but cheerful, exulting, of course." --
Here was a sly glance at Emma. "He had been so fortunate as to--
I forget the precise words--one has no business to remember them. The information was, as you state, that he was going to be married
to a Miss Hawkins. By his style, I should imagine it just settled." "Mr. Elton going to be married!" said Emma, as soon as she could speak. "He will have every body's wishes for his happiness." "He is very young to settle," was Mr. Woodhouse's observation. "He had better not be in a hurry. He seemed to me very well off
as he was. We were always glad to see him at Hartfield." "A new neighbour for us all, Miss Woodhouse!" said Miss Bates,
joyfully; "my mother is so pleased!--she says she cannot
bear to have the poor old Vicarage without a mistress. This is great news, indeed. Jane, you have never seen
Mr. Elton!--no wonder that you have such a curiosity to see him." Jane's curiosity did not appear of that absorbing nature as wholly
to occupy her. "No--I have never seen Mr. Elton," she replied, starting on this appeal;
"is he--is he a tall man?" "Who shall answer that question?" cried Emma. "My father would
say `yes,' Mr. Knightley `no;' and Miss Bates and I that he is
just the happy medium. When you have been here a little longer,
Miss Fairfax, you will understand that Mr. Elton is the standard
of perfection in Highbury, both in person and mind." "Very true, Miss Woodhouse, so she will. He is the very best
young man--But, my dear Jane, if you remember, I told you yesterday
he was precisely the height of Mr. Perry. Miss Hawkins,--I dare say,
an excellent young woman. His extreme attention to my mother--
wanting her to sit in the vicarage pew, that she might hear the better,
for my mother is a little deaf, you know--it is not much, but she
does not hear quite quick. Jane says that Colonel Campbell is a
little deaf. He fancied bathing might be good for it--the warm bath--
but she says it did him no lasting benefit. Colonel Campbell,
you know, is quite our angel. And Mr. Dixon seems a very charming
young man, quite worthy of him. It is such a happiness when good
people get together--and they always do. Now, here will be Mr. Elton
and Miss Hawkins; and there are the Coles, such very good people;
and the Perrys--I suppose there never was a happier or a better couple
than Mr. and Mrs. Perry. I say, sir," turning to Mr. Woodhouse,
"I think there are few places with such society as Highbury. I always say, we are quite blessed in our neighbours.--My dear sir,
if there is one thing my mother loves better than another, it is pork--
a roast loin of pork--"

"As to who, or what Miss Hawkins is, or how long he has been
acquainted with her," said Emma, "nothing I suppose can be known. One feels that it cannot be a very long acquaintance. He has been
gone only four weeks." Nobody had any information to give; and, after a few more wonderings,
Emma said,

"You are silent, Miss Fairfax--but I hope you mean to take
an interest in this news. You, who have been hearing and seeing
so much of late on these subjects, who must have been so deep
in the business on Miss Campbell's account--we shall not excuse
your being indifferent about Mr. Elton and Miss Hawkins." "When I have seen Mr. Elton," replied Jane, "I dare say I
shall be interested--but I believe it requires _that_ with me. And as it is some months since Miss Campbell married, the impression
may be a little worn off." "Yes, he has been gone just four weeks, as you observe, Miss Woodhouse,"
said Miss Bates, "four weeks yesterday.--A Miss Hawkins!--Well, I had
always rather fancied it would be some young lady hereabouts;
not that I ever--Mrs. Cole once whispered to me--but I immediately said,
`No, Mr. Elton is a most worthy young man--but'--In short, I do
not think I am particularly quick at those sort of discoveries. I do not pretend to it. What is before me, I see. At the same time,
nobody could wonder if Mr. Elton should have aspired--Miss Woodhouse
lets me chatter on, so good-humouredly. She knows I would not
offend for the world. How does Miss Smith do? She seems quite
recovered now. Have you heard from Mrs. John Knightley lately? Oh! those dear little children. Jane, do you know I always fancy
Mr. Dixon like Mr. John Knightley. I mean in person--tall, and with
that sort of look--and not very talkative." "Quite wrong, my dear aunt; there is no likeness at all." "Very odd! but one never does form a just idea of any body beforehand. One takes up a notion, and runs away with it. Mr. Dixon, you say,
is not, strictly speaking, handsome?" "Handsome! Oh! no--far from it--certainly plain. I told you he
was plain." "My dear, you said that Miss Campbell would not allow him to be plain,
and that you yourself--"

"Oh! as for me, my judgment is worth nothing. Where I have a regard,
I always think a person well-looking. But I gave what I believed
the general opinion, when I called him plain." "Well, my dear Jane, I believe we must be running away. The weather does not look well, and grandmama will be uneasy. You are too obliging, my dear Miss Woodhouse; but we really must
take leave. This has been a most agreeable piece of news indeed. I shall just go round by Mrs. Cole's; but I shall not stop three minutes:
and, Jane, you had better go home directly--I would not have you
out in a shower!--We think she is the better for Highbury already. Thank you, we do indeed. I shall not attempt calling on Mrs. Goddard,
for I really do not think she cares for any thing but _boiled_ pork:
when we dress the leg it will be another thing. Good morning to you,
my dear sir. Oh! Mr. Knightley is coming too. Well, that is
so very!--I am sure if Jane is tired, you will be so kind as to
give her your arm.--Mr. Elton, and Miss Hawkins!--Good morning
to you." Emma, alone with her father, had half her attention wanted by him
while he lamented that young people would be in such a hurry to marry--
and to marry strangers too--and the other half she could give
to her own view of the subject. It was to herself an amusing
and a very welcome piece of news, as proving that Mr. Elton
could not have suffered long; but she was sorry for Harriet:
Harriet must feel it--and all that she could hope was, by giving
the first information herself, to save her from hearing it abruptly
from others. It was now about the time that she was likely to call. If she were to meet Miss Bates in her way!--and upon its beginning
to rain, Emma was obliged to expect that the weather would be
detaining her at Mrs. Goddard's, and that the intelligence would
undoubtedly rush upon her without preparation. The shower was heavy, but short; and it had not been over five minutes,
when in came Harriet, with just the heated, agitated look which
hurrying thither with a full heart was likely to give; and the
"Oh! Miss Woodhouse, what do you think has happened!" which instantly
burst forth, had all the evidence of corresponding perturbation. As the blow was given, Emma felt that she could not now shew greater
kindness than in listening; and Harriet, unchecked, ran eagerly
through what she had to tell. "She had set out from Mrs. Goddard's
half an hour ago--she had been afraid it would rain--she had been
afraid it would pour down every moment--but she thought she might
get to Hartfield first--she had hurried on as fast as possible;
but then, as she was passing by the house where a young woman
was making up a gown for her, she thought she would just step
in and see how it went on; and though she did not seem to stay
half a moment there, soon after she came out it began to rain,
and she did not know what to do; so she ran on directly, as fast
as she could, and took shelter at Ford's." --Ford's was the principal
woollen-draper, linen-draper, and haberdasher's shop united;
the shop first in size and fashion in the place.--"And so,
there she had set, without an idea of any thing in the world,
full ten minutes, perhaps--when, all of a sudden, who should come in--
to be sure it was so very odd!--but they always dealt at Ford's--
who should come in, but Elizabeth Martin and her brother!--
Dear Miss Woodhouse! only think. I thought I should have fainted. I did not know what to do. I was sitting near the door--Elizabeth saw
me directly; but he did not; he was busy with the umbrella. I am sure she saw me, but she looked away directly, and took
no notice; and they both went to quite the farther end of the shop;
and I kept sitting near the door!--Oh! dear; I was so miserable! I am sure I must have been as white as my gown. I could not go away
you know, because of the rain; but I did so wish myself anywhere
in the world but there.--Oh! dear, Miss Woodhouse--well, at last,
I fancy, he looked round and saw me; for instead of going
on with her buyings, they began whispering to one another. I am sure they were talking of me; and I could not help thinking
that he was persuading her to speak to me--(do you think he was,
Miss Woodhouse?) --for presently she came forward--came quite up
to me, and asked me how I did, and seemed ready to shake hands,
if I would. She did not do any of it in the same way that she used;
I could see she was altered; but, however, she seemed to _try_ to be
very friendly, and we shook hands, and stood talking some time;
but I know no more what I said--I was in such a tremble!--I remember
she said she was sorry we never met now; which I thought almost
too kind! Dear, Miss Woodhouse, I was absolutely miserable! By that time, it was beginning to hold up, and I was determined
that nothing should stop me from getting away--and then--only think!--
I found he was coming up towards me too--slowly you know, and as
if he did not quite know what to do; and so he came and spoke,
and I answered--and I stood for a minute, feeling dreadfully,
you know, one can't tell how; and then I took courage, and said it
did not rain, and I must go; and so off I set; and I had not got
three yards from the door, when he came after me, only to say,
if I was going to Hartfield, he thought I had much better go round
by Mr. Cole's stables, for I should find the near way quite floated
by this rain. Oh! dear, I thought it would have been the death of me! So I said, I was very much obliged to him:  you know I could
not do less; and then he went back to Elizabeth, and I came round
by the stables--I believe I did--but I hardly knew where I was,
or any thing about it. Oh! Miss Woodhouse, I would rather done
any thing than have it happen:  and yet, you know, there was a sort
of satisfaction in seeing him behave so pleasantly and so kindly. And Elizabeth, too. Oh! Miss Woodhouse, do talk to me and make
me comfortable again." Very sincerely did Emma wish to do so; but it was not immediately in
her power. She was obliged to stop and think. She was not thoroughly
comfortable herself. The young man's conduct, and his sister's,
seemed the result of real feeling, and she could not but pity them. As Harriet described it, there had been an interesting mixture
of wounded affection and genuine delicacy in their behaviour. But she had believed them to be well-meaning, worthy people before;
and what difference did this make in the evils of the connexion? It was folly to be disturbed by it. Of course, he must be sorry
to lose her--they must be all sorry. Ambition, as well as love,
had probably been mortified. They might all have hoped to rise
by Harriet's acquaintance:  and besides, what was the value of
Harriet's description?--So easily pleased--so little discerning;--
what signified her praise? She exerted herself, and did try to make her comfortable,
by considering all that had passed as a mere trifle, and quite
unworthy of being dwelt on,

"It might be distressing, for the moment," said she; "but you seem
to have behaved extremely well; and it is over--and may never--
can never, as a first meeting, occur again, and therefore you need
not think about it." Harriet said, "very true," and she "would not think about it;"
but still she talked of it--still she could talk of nothing else;
and Emma, at last, in order to put the Martins out of her head,
was obliged to hurry on the news, which she had meant to give
with so much tender caution; hardly knowing herself whether
to rejoice or be angry, ashamed or only amused, at such a state
of mind in poor Harriet--such a conclusion of Mr. Elton's importance
with her! Mr. Elton's rights, however, gradually revived. Though she did not
feel the first intelligence as she might have done the day before,
or an hour before, its interest soon increased; and before their
first conversation was over, she had talked herself into all the
sensations of curiosity, wonder and regret, pain and pleasure,
as to this fortunate Miss Hawkins, which could conduce to place
the Martins under proper subordination in her fancy. Emma learned to be rather glad that there had been such a meeting. It had been serviceable in deadening the first shock, without retaining
any influence to alarm. As Harriet now lived, the Martins could
not get at her, without seeking her, where hitherto they had wanted
either the courage or the condescension to seek her; for since her
refusal of the brother, the sisters never had been at Mrs. Goddard's;
and a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again,
with any necessity, or even any power of speech. CHAPTER IV


Human nature is so well disposed towards those who are in
interesting situations, that a young person, who either marries
or dies, is sure of being kindly spoken of. A week had not passed since Miss Hawkins's name was first
mentioned in Highbury, before she was, by some means or other,
discovered to have every recommendation of person and mind;
to be handsome, elegant, highly accomplished, and perfectly amiable:
and when Mr. Elton himself arrived to triumph in his happy prospects,
and circulate the fame of her merits, there was very little more
for him to do, than to tell her Christian name, and say whose
music she principally played. Mr. Elton returned, a very happy man. He had gone away rejected
and mortified--disappointed in a very sanguine hope, after a series
of what appeared to him strong encouragement; and not only losing
the right lady, but finding himself debased to the level of a very
wrong one. He had gone away deeply offended--he came back engaged
to another--and to another as superior, of course, to the first,
as under such circumstances what is gained always is to what is lost. He came back gay and self-satisfied, eager and busy, caring nothing
for Miss Woodhouse, and defying Miss Smith. The charming Augusta Hawkins, in addition to all the usual advantages
of perfect beauty and merit, was in possession of an independent fortune,
of so many thousands as would always be called ten; a point of
some dignity, as well as some convenience:  the story told well;
he had not thrown himself away--he had gained a woman of 10,000 l.
or thereabouts; and he had gained her with such delightful rapidity--
the first hour of introduction had been so very soon followed by
distinguishing notice; the history which he had to give Mrs. Cole
of the rise and progress of the affair was so glorious--the steps
so quick, from the accidental rencontre, to the dinner at Mr. Green's,
and the party at Mrs. Brown's--smiles and blushes rising in importance--
with consciousness and agitation richly scattered--the lady
had been so easily impressed--so sweetly disposed--had in short,
to use a most intelligible phrase, been so very ready to have him,
that vanity and prudence were equally contented. He had caught both substance and shadow--both fortune and affection,
and was just the happy man he ought to be; talking only of himself
and his own concerns--expecting to be congratulated--ready to be
laughed at--and, with cordial, fearless smiles, now addressing
all the young ladies of the place, to whom, a few weeks ago,
he would have been more cautiously gallant. The wedding was no distant event, as the parties had only themselves
to please, and nothing but the necessary preparations to wait for;
and when he set out for Bath again, there was a general expectation,
which a certain glance of Mrs. Cole's did not seem to contradict,
that when he next entered Highbury he would bring his bride. During his present short stay, Emma had barely seen him; but just
enough to feel that the first meeting was over, and to give her
the impression of his not being improved by the mixture of pique
and pretension, now spread over his air. She was, in fact,
beginning very much to wonder that she had ever thought him pleasing
at all; and his sight was so inseparably connected with some very
disagreeable feelings, that, except in a moral light, as a penance,
a lesson, a source of profitable humiliation to her own mind,
she would have been thankful to be assured of never seeing him again. She wished him very well; but he gave her pain, and his welfare
twenty miles off would administer most satisfaction. The pain of his continued residence in Highbury, however, must certainly
be lessened by his marriage. Many vain solicitudes would be prevented--
many awkwardnesses smoothed by it. A _Mrs._ _Elton_ would be an excuse for
any change of intercourse; former intimacy might sink without remark. It would be almost beginning their life of civility again. Of the lady, individually, Emma thought very little. She was good
enough for Mr. Elton, no doubt; accomplished enough for Highbury--
handsome enough--to look plain, probably, by Harriet's side. As to connexion, there Emma was perfectly easy; persuaded,
that after all his own vaunted claims and disdain of Harriet,
he had done nothing. On that article, truth seemed attainable. _What_ she was, must be uncertain; but _who_ she was, might be found out;
and setting aside the 10,000 l., it did not appear that she was at
all Harriet's superior. She brought no name, no blood, no alliance. Miss Hawkins was the youngest of the two daughters of a Bristol--
merchant, of course, he must be called; but, as the whole of the
profits of his mercantile life appeared so very moderate, it was
not unfair to guess the dignity of his line of trade had been very
moderate also. Part of every winter she had been used to spend in Bath;
but Bristol was her home, the very heart of Bristol; for though
the father and mother had died some years ago, an uncle remained--
in the law line--nothing more distinctly honourable was hazarded
of him, than that he was in the law line; and with him the daughter
had lived. Emma guessed him to be the drudge of some attorney,
and too stupid to rise. And all the grandeur of the connexion
seemed dependent on the elder sister, who was _very_ _well_ _married_,
to a gentleman in a _great_ _way_, near Bristol, who kept two carriages! That was the wind-up of the history; that was the glory of
Miss Hawkins. Could she but have given Harriet her feelings about it all! She had talked her into love; but, alas! she was not so easily to be
talked out of it. The charm of an object to occupy the many vacancies
of Harriet's mind was not to be talked away. He might be superseded
by another; he certainly would indeed; nothing could be clearer;
even a Robert Martin would have been sufficient; but nothing else,
she feared, would cure her. Harriet was one of those, who,
having once begun, would be always in love. And now, poor girl! she was considerably worse from this reappearance of Mr. Elton. She was always having a glimpse of him somewhere or other. Emma saw
him only once; but two or three times every day Harriet was sure
_just_ to meet with him, or _just_ to miss him, _just_ to hear his voice,
or see his shoulder, _just_ to have something occur to preserve him
in her fancy, in all the favouring warmth of surprize and conjecture. She was, moreover, perpetually hearing about him; for, excepting when
at Hartfield, she was always among those who saw no fault in Mr. Elton,
and found nothing so interesting as the discussion of his concerns;
and every report, therefore, every guess--all that had already
occurred, all that might occur in the arrangement of his affairs,
comprehending income, servants, and furniture, was continually
in agitation around her. Her regard was receiving strength by
invariable praise of him, and her regrets kept alive, and feelings
irritated by ceaseless repetitions of Miss Hawkins's happiness,
and continual observation of, how much he seemed attached!--
his air as he walked by the house--the very sitting of his hat,
being all in proof of how much he was in love! Had it been allowable entertainment, had there been no pain
to her friend, or reproach to herself, in the waverings of
Harriet's mind, Emma would have been amused by its variations. Sometimes Mr. Elton predominated, sometimes the Martins; and each
was occasionally useful as a check to the other. Mr. Elton's
engagement had been the cure of the agitation of meeting Mr. Martin. The unhappiness produced by the knowledge of that engagement had been
a little put aside by Elizabeth Martin's calling at Mrs. Goddard's
a few days afterwards. Harriet had not been at home; but a note had
been prepared and left for her, written in the very style to touch;
a small mixture of reproach, with a great deal of kindness;
and till Mr. Elton himself appeared, she had been much occupied
by it, continually pondering over what could be done in return,
and wishing to do more than she dared to confess. But Mr. Elton,
in person, had driven away all such cares. While he staid,
the Martins were forgotten; and on the very morning of his setting off
for Bath again, Emma, to dissipate some of the distress it occasioned,
judged it best for her to return Elizabeth Martin's visit. How that visit was to be acknowledged--what would be necessary--
and what might be safest, had been a point of some doubtful
consideration. Absolute neglect of the mother and sisters,
when invited to come, would be ingratitude. It must not be:
and yet the danger of a renewal of the acquaintance!--

After much thinking, she could determine on nothing better, than Harriet's
returning the visit; but in a way that, if they had understanding,
should convince them that it was to be only a formal acquaintance. She meant to take her in the carriage, leave her at the Abbey Mill,
while she drove a little farther, and call for her again so soon,
as to allow no time for insidious applications or dangerous
recurrences to the past, and give the most decided proof of what
degree of intimacy was chosen for the future. She could think of nothing better:  and though there was something
in it which her own heart could not approve--something of ingratitude,
merely glossed over--it must be done, or what would become of Harriet? CHAPTER V


Small heart had Harriet for visiting. Only half an hour before her
friend called for her at Mrs. Goddard's, her evil stars had led
her to the very spot where, at that moment, a trunk, directed to
_The_ _Rev._ _Philip_ _Elton_, _White-Hart_, _Bath_, was to be seen under the
operation of being lifted into the butcher's cart, which was to
convey it to where the coaches past; and every thing in this world,
excepting that trunk and the direction, was consequently a blank. She went, however; and when they reached the farm, and she was to
be put down, at the end of the broad, neat gravel walk, which led
between espalier apple-trees to the front door, the sight of every
thing which had given her so much pleasure the autumn before,
was beginning to revive a little local agitation; and when they parted,
Emma observed her to be looking around with a sort of fearful curiosity,
which determined her not to allow the visit to exceed the proposed
quarter of an hour. She went on herself, to give that portion
of time to an old servant who was married, and settled in Donwell. The quarter of an hour brought her punctually to the white gate again;
and Miss Smith receiving her summons, was with her without delay,
and unattended by any alarming young man. She came solitarily
down the gravel walk--a Miss Martin just appearing at the door,
and parting with her seemingly with ceremonious civility. Harriet could not very soon give an intelligible account. She was feeling too much; but at last Emma collected from her
enough to understand the sort of meeting, and the sort of pain it
was creating. She had seen only Mrs. Martin and the two girls. They had received her doubtingly, if not coolly; and nothing
beyond the merest commonplace had been talked almost all the time--
till just at last, when Mrs. Martin's saying, all of a sudden,
that she thought Miss Smith was grown, had brought on a more
interesting subject, and a warmer manner. In that very room
she had been measured last September, with her two friends. There were the pencilled marks and memorandums on the wainscot by
the window. _He_ had done it. They all seemed to remember the day,
the hour, the party, the occasion--to feel the same consciousness,
the same regrets--to be ready to return to the same good understanding;
and they were just growing again like themselves, (Harriet, as Emma
must suspect, as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy,)
when the carriage reappeared, and all was over. The style of
the visit, and the shortness of it, were then felt to be decisive. Fourteen minutes to be given to those with whom she had thankfully
passed six weeks not six months ago!--Emma could not but picture
it all, and feel how justly they might resent, how naturally
Harriet must suffer. It was a bad business. She would have given
a great deal, or endured a great deal, to have had the Martins
in a higher rank of life. They were so deserving, that a _little_
higher should have been enough:  but as it was, how could she have
done otherwise?--Impossible!--She could not repent. They must
be separated; but there was a great deal of pain in the process--
so much to herself at this time, that she soon felt the necessity
of a little consolation, and resolved on going home by way of Randalls
to procure it. Her mind was quite sick of Mr. Elton and the Martins. The refreshment of Randalls was absolutely necessary. It was a good scheme; but on driving to the door they heard
that neither "master nor mistress was at home;" they had both
been out some time; the man believed they were gone to Hartfield. "This is too bad," cried Emma, as they turned away. "And now we
shall just miss them; too provoking!--I do not know when I have been
so disappointed." And she leaned back in the corner, to indulge
her murmurs, or to reason them away; probably a little of both--
such being the commonest process of a not ill-disposed mind. Presently the carriage stopt; she looked up; it was stopt
by Mr. and Mrs. Weston, who were standing to speak to her. There was instant pleasure in the sight of them, and still greater
pleasure was conveyed in sound--for Mr. Weston immediately accosted
her with,

"How d'ye do?--how d'ye do?--We have been sitting with your father--
glad to see him so well. Frank comes to-morrow--I had a letter
this morning--we see him to-morrow by dinner-time to a certainty--
he is at Oxford to-day, and he comes for a whole fortnight; I knew it would
be so. If he had come at Christmas he could not have staid three days;
I was always glad he did not come at Christmas; now we are going
to have just the right weather for him, fine, dry, settled weather. We shall enjoy him completely; every thing has turned out exactly
as we could wish." There was no resisting such news, no possibility of avoiding the
influence of such a happy face as Mr. Weston's, confirmed as it all
was by the words and the countenance of his wife, fewer and quieter,
but not less to the purpose. To know that _she_ thought his coming
certain was enough to make Emma consider it so, and sincerely did
she rejoice in their joy. It was a most delightful reanimation
of exhausted spirits. The worn-out past was sunk in the freshness
of what was coming; and in the rapidity of half a moment's thought,
she hoped Mr. Elton would now be talked of no more. Mr. Weston gave her the history of the engagements at Enscombe,
which allowed his son to answer for having an entire fortnight at
his command, as well as the route and the method of his journey;
and she listened, and smiled, and congratulated. "I shall soon bring him over to Hartfield," said he, at the conclusion. Emma could imagine she saw a touch of the arm at this speech,
from his wife. "We had better move on, Mr. Weston," said she, "we are detaining
the girls." "Well, well, I am ready;"--and turning again to Emma, "but you must
not be expecting such a _very_ fine young man; you have only had _my_
account you know; I dare say he is really nothing extraordinary:"--
though his own sparkling eyes at the moment were speaking a very
different conviction. Emma could look perfectly unconscious and innocent, and answer
in a manner that appropriated nothing. "Think of me to-morrow, my dear Emma, about four o'clock,"
was Mrs. Weston's parting injunction; spoken with some anxiety,
and meant only for her. "Four o'clock!--depend upon it he will be here by three," was Mr. Weston's
quick amendment; and so ended a most satisfactory meeting. Emma's spirits were mounted quite up to happiness; every thing wore
a different air; James and his horses seemed not half so sluggish
as before. When she looked at the hedges, she thought the elder at
least must soon be coming out; and when she turned round to Harriet,
she saw something like a look of spring, a tender smile even there. "Will Mr. Frank Churchill pass through Bath as well as Oxford?" --
was a question, however, which did not augur much. But neither geography nor tranquillity could come all at once,
and Emma was now in a humour to resolve that they should both come
in time. The morning of the interesting day arrived, and Mrs. Weston's
faithful pupil did not forget either at ten, or eleven, or twelve
o'clock, that she was to think of her at four. "My dear, dear anxious friend,"--said she, in mental soliloquy,
while walking downstairs from her own room, "always overcareful
for every body's comfort but your own; I see you now in all your
little fidgets, going again and again into his room, to be sure
that all is right." The clock struck twelve as she passed through
the hall. "'Tis twelve; I shall not forget to think of you four
hours hence; and by this time to-morrow, perhaps, or a little later,
I may be thinking of the possibility of their all calling here. I am sure they will bring him soon." She opened the parlour door, and saw two gentlemen sitting with
her father--Mr. Weston and his son. They had been arrived only
a few minutes, and Mr. Weston had scarcely finished his explanation
of Frank's being a day before his time, and her father was yet
in the midst of his very civil welcome and congratulations, when
she appeared, to have her share of surprize, introduction, and pleasure. The Frank Churchill so long talked of, so high in interest,
was actually before her--he was presented to her, and she did
not think too much had been said in his praise; he was a _very_ good
looking young man; height, air, address, all were unexceptionable,
and his countenance had a great deal of the spirit and liveliness
of his father's; he looked quick and sensible. She felt immediately
that she should like him; and there was a well-bred ease of manner,
and a readiness to talk, which convinced her that he came intending
to be acquainted with her, and that acquainted they soon must be. He had reached Randalls the evening before. She was pleased
with the eagerness to arrive which had made him alter his plan,
and travel earlier, later, and quicker, that he might gain half
a day. "I told you yesterday," cried Mr. Weston with exultation, "I told
you all that he would be here before the time named. I remembered
what I used to do myself. One cannot creep upon a journey;
one cannot help getting on faster than one has planned; and the
pleasure of coming in upon one's friends before the look-out begins,
is worth a great deal more than any little exertion it needs." "It is a great pleasure where one can indulge in it," said the young man,
"though there are not many houses that I should presume on so far;
but in coming _home_ I felt I might do any thing." The word _home_ made his father look on him with fresh complacency. Emma was directly sure that he knew how to make himself agreeable;
the conviction was strengthened by what followed. He was very much
pleased with Randalls, thought it a most admirably arranged house,
would hardly allow it even to be very small, admired the situation,
the walk to Highbury, Highbury itself, Hartfield still more,
and professed himself to have always felt the sort of interest
in the country which none but one's _own_ country gives, and the
greatest curiosity to visit it. That he should never have been
able to indulge so amiable a feeling before, passed suspiciously
through Emma's brain; but still, if it were a falsehood, it was a
pleasant one, and pleasantly handled. His manner had no air of study
or exaggeration. He did really look and speak as if in a state of no
common enjoyment. Their subjects in general were such as belong to an opening acquaintance. On his side were the inquiries,--"Was she a horsewoman?--Pleasant rides?--
Pleasant walks?--Had they a large neighbourhood?--Highbury, perhaps,
afforded society enough?--There were several very pretty houses
in and about it.--Balls--had they balls?--Was it a musical society?" But when satisfied on all these points, and their acquaintance
proportionably advanced, he contrived to find an opportunity,
while their two fathers were engaged with each other, of introducing
his mother-in-law, and speaking of her with so much handsome praise,
so much warm admiration, so much gratitude for the happiness she
secured to his father, and her very kind reception of himself,
as was an additional proof of his knowing how to please--
and of his certainly thinking it worth while to try to please her. He did not advance a word of praise beyond what she knew to be
thoroughly deserved by Mrs. Weston; but, undoubtedly he could know
very little of the matter. He understood what would be welcome;
he could be sure of little else. "His father's marriage," he said,
"had been the wisest measure, every friend must rejoice in it;
and the family from whom he had received such a blessing must
be ever considered as having conferred the highest obligation
on him." He got as near as he could to thanking her for Miss Taylor's merits,
without seeming quite to forget that in the common course of things it
was to be rather supposed that Miss Taylor had formed Miss Woodhouse's
character, than Miss Woodhouse Miss Taylor's. And at last, as if resolved
to qualify his opinion completely for travelling round to its object, he
wound it all up with astonishment at the youth and beauty of her person. "Elegant, agreeable manners, I was prepared for," said he;
"but I confess that, considering every thing, I had not expected
more than a very tolerably well-looking woman of a certain age;
I did not know that I was to find a pretty young woman in Mrs. Weston." "You cannot see too much perfection in Mrs. Weston for my feelings,"
said Emma; "were you to guess her to be _eighteen_, I should listen
with pleasure; but _she_ would be ready to quarrel with you for using
such words. Don't let her imagine that you have spoken of her as
a pretty young woman." "I hope I should know better," he replied; "no, depend upon it,
(with a gallant bow,) that in addressing Mrs. Weston I should
understand whom I might praise without any danger of being thought
extravagant in my terms." Emma wondered whether the same suspicion of what might be expected
from their knowing each other, which had taken strong possession
of her mind, had ever crossed his; and whether his compliments were
to be considered as marks of acquiescence, or proofs of defiance. She must see more of him to understand his ways; at present she
only felt they were agreeable. She had no doubt of what Mr. Weston was often thinking about. His quick eye she detected again and again glancing towards them
with a happy expression; and even, when he might have determined not
to look, she was confident that he was often listening. Her own father's perfect exemption from any thought of the kind,
the entire deficiency in him of all such sort of penetration
or suspicion, was a most comfortable circumstance. Happily he
was not farther from approving matrimony than from foreseeing it.--
Though always objecting to every marriage that was arranged,
he never suffered beforehand from the apprehension of any;
it seemed as if he could not think so ill of any two persons'
understanding as to suppose they meant to marry till it were
proved against them. She blessed the favouring blindness. He could now, without the drawback of a single unpleasant surmise,
without a glance forward at any possible treachery in his guest,
give way to all his natural kind-hearted civility in solicitous
inquiries after Mr. Frank Churchill's accommodation on his journey,
through the sad evils of sleeping two nights on the road, and express
very genuine unmixed anxiety to know that he had certainly escaped
catching cold--which, however, he could not allow him to feel quite
assured of himself till after another night. A reasonable visit paid, Mr. Weston began to move.--"He must be going. He had business at the Crown about his hay, and a great many errands
for Mrs. Weston at Ford's, but he need not hurry any body else." His son, too well bred to hear the hint, rose immediately also,
saying,

"As you are going farther on business, sir, I will take the
opportunity of paying a visit, which must be paid some day or other,
and therefore may as well be paid now. I have the honour of being
acquainted with a neighbour of yours, (turning to Emma,) a lady
residing in or near Highbury; a family of the name of Fairfax. I shall have no difficulty, I suppose, in finding the house;
though Fairfax, I believe, is not the proper name--I should rather
say Barnes, or Bates. Do you know any family of that name?" "To be sure we do," cried his father; "Mrs. Bates--we passed her house--
I saw Miss Bates at the window. True, true, you are acquainted
with Miss Fairfax; I remember you knew her at Weymouth, and a fine
girl she is. Call upon her, by all means." "There is no necessity for my calling this morning," said the
young man; "another day would do as well; but there was that degree
of acquaintance at Weymouth which--"

"Oh! go to-day, go to-day. Do not defer it. What is right to be done
cannot be done too soon. And, besides, I must give you a hint, Frank;
any want of attention to her _here_ should be carefully avoided. You saw her with the Campbells, when she was the equal of every body
she mixed with, but here she is with a poor old grandmother,
who has barely enough to live on. If you do not call early it
will be a slight." The son looked convinced. "I have heard her speak of the acquaintance," said Emma; "she is
a very elegant young woman." He agreed to it, but with so quiet a "Yes," as inclined her almost
to doubt his real concurrence; and yet there must be a very distinct
sort of elegance for the fashionable world, if Jane Fairfax could
be thought only ordinarily gifted with it. "If you were never particularly struck by her manners before,"
said she, "I think you will to-day. You will see her to advantage;
see her and hear her--no, I am afraid you will not hear her at all,
for she has an aunt who never holds her tongue." "You are acquainted with Miss Jane Fairfax, sir, are you?" said Mr. Woodhouse, always the last to make his way in conversation;
"then give me leave to assure you that you will find her a very
agreeable young lady. She is staying here on a visit to her grandmama
and aunt, very worthy people; I have known them all my life. They will be extremely glad to see you, I am sure; and one of my
servants shall go with you to shew you the way." "My dear sir, upon no account in the world; my father can direct me." "But your father is not going so far; he is only going to the Crown,
quite on the other side of the street, and there are a great many houses;
you might be very much at a loss, and it is a very dirty walk,
unless you keep on the footpath; but my coachman can tell you
where you had best cross the street." Mr. Frank Churchill still declined it, looking as serious as he could,
and his father gave his hearty support by calling out, "My good friend,
this is quite unnecessary; Frank knows a puddle of water when he
sees it, and as to Mrs. Bates's, he may get there from the Crown
in a hop, step, and jump." They were permitted to go alone; and with a cordial nod from one,
and a graceful bow from the other, the two gentlemen took leave. Emma remained very well pleased with this beginning of the acquaintance,
and could now engage to think of them all at Randalls any hour of
the day, with full confidence in their comfort. CHAPTER VI


The next morning brought Mr. Frank Churchill again. He came with
Mrs. Weston, to whom and to Highbury he seemed to take very cordially. He had been sitting with her, it appeared, most companionably at home,
till her usual hour of exercise; and on being desired to chuse
their walk, immediately fixed on Highbury.--"He did not doubt there
being very pleasant walks in every direction, but if left to him,
he should always chuse the same. Highbury, that airy, cheerful,
happy-looking Highbury, would be his constant attraction." --
Highbury, with Mrs. Weston, stood for Hartfield; and she trusted to
its bearing the same construction with him. They walked thither directly. Emma had hardly expected them:  for Mr. Weston, who had called in
for half a minute, in order to hear that his son was very handsome,
knew nothing of their plans; and it was an agreeable surprize
to her, therefore, to perceive them walking up to the house together,
arm in arm. She was wanting to see him again, and especially
to see him in company with Mrs. Weston, upon his behaviour to whom
her opinion of him was to depend. If he were deficient there,
nothing should make amends for it. But on seeing them together,
she became perfectly satisfied. It was not merely in fine words
or hyperbolical compliment that he paid his duty; nothing could be
more proper or pleasing than his whole manner to her--nothing could
more agreeably denote his wish of considering her as a friend and
securing her affection. And there was time enough for Emma to form a
reasonable judgment, as their visit included all the rest of the morning. They were all three walking about together for an hour or two--
first round the shrubberies of Hartfield, and afterwards in Highbury. He was delighted with every thing; admired Hartfield sufficiently
for Mr. Woodhouse's ear; and when their going farther was resolved on,
confessed his wish to be made acquainted with the whole village,
and found matter of commendation and interest much oftener than Emma
could have supposed. Some of the objects of his curiosity spoke very amiable feelings. He begged to be shewn the house which his father had lived in so long,
and which had been the home of his father's father; and on recollecting
that an old woman who had nursed him was still living, walked in quest
of her cottage from one end of the street to the other; and though
in some points of pursuit or observation there was no positive merit,
they shewed, altogether, a good-will towards Highbury in general,
which must be very like a merit to those he was with. Emma watched and decided, that with such feelings as were now shewn,
it could not be fairly supposed that he had been ever voluntarily
absenting himself; that he had not been acting a part, or making
a parade of insincere professions; and that Mr. Knightley certainly
had not done him justice. Their first pause was at the Crown Inn, an inconsiderable house,
though the principal one of the sort, where a couple of pair of
post-horses were kept, more for the convenience of the neighbourhood
than from any run on the road; and his companions had not expected
to be detained by any interest excited there; but in passing it they
gave the history of the large room visibly added; it had been built
many years ago for a ball-room, and while the neighbourhood had been
in a particularly populous, dancing state, had been occasionally used
as such;--but such brilliant days had long passed away, and now the
highest purpose for which it was ever wanted was to accommodate a whist
club established among the gentlemen and half-gentlemen of the place. He was immediately interested. Its character as a ball-room caught him;
and instead of passing on, he stopt for several minutes at the two
superior sashed windows which were open, to look in and contemplate
its capabilities, and lament that its original purpose should
have ceased. He saw no fault in the room, he would acknowledge
none which they suggested. No, it was long enough, broad enough,
handsome enough. It would hold the very number for comfort. They ought to have balls there at least every fortnight through
the winter. Why had not Miss Woodhouse revived the former good
old days of the room?--She who could do any thing in Highbury! The want of proper families in the place, and the conviction
that none beyond the place and its immediate environs could be
tempted to attend, were mentioned; but he was not satisfied. He could not be persuaded that so many good-looking houses as he saw
around him, could not furnish numbers enough for such a meeting;
and even when particulars were given and families described, he was
still unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixture
would be any thing, or that there would be the smallest difficulty
in every body's returning into their proper place the next morning. He argued like a young man very much bent on dancing; and Emma
was rather surprized to see the constitution of the Weston prevail
so decidedly against the habits of the Churchills. He seemed to have
all the life and spirit, cheerful feelings, and social inclinations
of his father, and nothing of the pride or reserve of Enscombe. Of pride, indeed, there was, perhaps, scarcely enough; his indifference
to a confusion of rank, bordered too much on inelegance of mind. He could be no judge, however, of the evil he was holding cheap. It was but an effusion of lively spirits. At last he was persuaded to move on from the front of the Crown;
and being now almost facing the house where the Bateses lodged,
Emma recollected his intended visit the day before, and asked him
if he had paid it. "Yes, oh! yes"--he replied; "I was just going to mention it. A very successful visit:--I saw all the three ladies; and felt very
much obliged to you for your preparatory hint. If the talking aunt
had taken me quite by surprize, it must have been the death of me. As it was, I was only betrayed into paying a most unreasonable visit. Ten minutes would have been all that was necessary, perhaps all that
was proper; and I had told my father I should certainly be at home
before him--but there was no getting away, no pause; and, to my
utter astonishment, I found, when he (finding me nowhere else)
joined me there at last, that I had been actually sitting with them
very nearly three-quarters of an hour. The good lady had not given me
the possibility of escape before." "And how did you think Miss Fairfax looking?" "Ill, very ill--that is, if a young lady can ever be allowed to look ill. But the expression is hardly admissible, Mrs. Weston, is it? Ladies can never look ill.  And, seriously, Miss Fairfax is naturally
so pale, as almost always to give the appearance of ill health.--
A most deplorable want of complexion." Emma would not agree to this, and began a warm defence of Miss
Fairfax's complexion. "It was certainly never brilliant, but she
would not allow it to have a sickly hue in general; and there was
a softness and delicacy in her skin which gave peculiar elegance
to the character of her face." He listened with all due deference;
acknowledged that he had heard many people say the same--but yet he
must confess, that to him nothing could make amends for the want
of the fine glow of health. Where features were indifferent,
a fine complexion gave beauty to them all; and where they were good,
the effect was--fortunately he need not attempt to describe what the
effect was. "Well," said Emma, "there is no disputing about taste.--At least
you admire her except her complexion." He shook his head and laughed.--"I cannot separate Miss Fairfax
and her complexion." "Did you see her often at Weymouth? Were you often in the same society?" At this moment they were approaching Ford's, and he hastily exclaimed,
"Ha! this must be the very shop that every body attends every day
of their lives, as my father informs me. He comes to Highbury himself,
he says, six days out of the seven, and has always business at Ford's. If it be not inconvenient to you, pray let us go in, that I may prove
myself to belong to the place, to be a true citizen of Highbury. I must buy something at Ford's. It will be taking out my freedom.--
I dare say they sell gloves." "Oh! yes, gloves and every thing. I do admire your patriotism. You will be adored in Highbury. You were very popular before you came,
because you were Mr. Weston's son--but lay out half a guinea at
Ford's, and your popularity will stand upon your own virtues." They went in; and while the sleek, well-tied parcels of "Men's Beavers"
and "York Tan" were bringing down and displaying on the counter,
he said--"But I beg your pardon, Miss Woodhouse, you were speaking
to me, you were saying something at the very moment of this burst
of my _amor_ _patriae_. Do not let me lose it. I assure you the utmost
stretch of public fame would not make me amends for the loss of any
happiness in private life." "I merely asked, whether you had known much of Miss Fairfax
and her party at Weymouth." "And now that I understand your question, I must pronounce it to be a
very unfair one. It is always the lady's right to decide on the degree
of acquaintance. Miss Fairfax must already have given her account.--
I shall not commit myself by claiming more than she may chuse to allow." "Upon my word! you answer as discreetly as she could do herself. But her account of every thing leaves so much to be guessed,
she is so very reserved, so very unwilling to give the least
information about any body, that I really think you may say what you
like of your acquaintance with her." "May I, indeed?--Then I will speak the truth, and nothing suits me
so well. I met her frequently at Weymouth. I had known the Campbells
a little in town; and at Weymouth we were very much in the same set. Colonel Campbell is a very agreeable man, and Mrs. Campbell a friendly,
warm-hearted woman. I like them all." "You know Miss Fairfax's situation in life, I conclude; what she
is destined to be?" "Yes--(rather hesitatingly)--I believe I do." "You get upon delicate subjects, Emma," said Mrs. Weston smiling;
"remember that I am here.--Mr. Frank Churchill hardly knows
what to say when you speak of Miss Fairfax's situation in life. I will move a little farther off." "I certainly do forget to think of _her_," said Emma, "as having ever
been any thing but my friend and my dearest friend." He looked as if he fully understood and honoured such a sentiment. When the gloves were bought, and they had quitted the shop again,
"Did you ever hear the young lady we were speaking of, play?" said Frank Churchill. "Ever hear her!" repeated Emma. "You forget how much she belongs
to Highbury. I have heard her every year of our lives since we
both began. She plays charmingly." "You think so, do you?--I wanted the opinion of some one who
could really judge. She appeared to me to play well, that is,
with considerable taste, but I know nothing of the matter myself.--
I am excessively fond of music, but without the smallest skill
or right of judging of any body's performance.--I have been used
to hear her's admired; and I remember one proof of her being
thought to play well:--a man, a very musical man, and in love
with another woman--engaged to her--on the point of marriage--
would yet never ask that other woman to sit down to the instrument,
if the lady in question could sit down instead--never seemed
to like to hear one if he could hear the other. That, I thought,
in a man of known musical talent, was some proof." "Proof indeed!" said Emma, highly amused.--"Mr. Dixon is very musical,
is he? We shall know more about them all, in half an hour, from you,
than Miss Fairfax would have vouchsafed in half a year." "Yes, Mr. Dixon and Miss Campbell were the persons; and I thought
it a very strong proof." "Certainly--very strong it was; to own the truth, a great deal
stronger than, if _I_ had been Miss Campbell, would have been at all
agreeable to me. I could not excuse a man's having more music
than love--more ear than eye--a more acute sensibility to fine
sounds than to my feelings. How did Miss Campbell appear to like it?" "It was her very particular friend, you know." "Poor comfort!" said Emma, laughing. "One would rather have a stranger
preferred than one's very particular friend--with a stranger it might
not recur again--but the misery of having a very particular friend
always at hand, to do every thing better than one does oneself!--
Poor Mrs. Dixon! Well, I am glad she is gone to settle in Ireland." "You are right. It was not very flattering to Miss Campbell;
but she really did not seem to feel it." "So much the better--or so much the worse:--I do not know which. But be it sweetness or be it stupidity in her--quickness of friendship,
or dulness of feeling--there was one person, I think, who must have
felt it:  Miss Fairfax herself. She must have felt the improper
and dangerous distinction." "As to that--I do not--"

"Oh! do not imagine that I expect an account of Miss Fairfax's
sensations from you, or from any body else. They are known to no
human being, I guess, but herself. But if she continued to play
whenever she was asked by Mr. Dixon, one may guess what one chuses." "There appeared such a perfectly good understanding among them all--"
he began rather quickly, but checking himself, added, "however, it
is impossible for me to say on what terms they really were--
how it might all be behind the scenes. I can only say that there
was smoothness outwardly. But you, who have known Miss Fairfax from
a child, must be a better judge of her character, and of how she
is likely to conduct herself in critical situations, than I can be." "I have known her from a child, undoubtedly; we have been children
and women together; and it is natural to suppose that we should
be intimate,--that we should have taken to each other whenever
she visited her friends. But we never did. I hardly know how it
has happened; a little, perhaps, from that wickedness on my side
which was prone to take disgust towards a girl so idolized
and so cried up as she always was, by her aunt and grandmother,
and all their set. And then, her reserve--I never could attach
myself to any one so completely reserved." "It is a most repulsive quality, indeed," said he. "Oftentimes
very convenient, no doubt, but never pleasing. There is safety
in reserve, but no attraction. One cannot love a reserved person." "Not till the reserve ceases towards oneself; and then the attraction
may be the greater. But I must be more in want of a friend,
or an agreeable companion, than I have yet been, to take
the trouble of conquering any body's reserve to procure one. Intimacy between Miss Fairfax and me is quite out of the question. I have no reason to think ill of her--not the least--except that
such extreme and perpetual cautiousness of word and manner,
such a dread of giving a distinct idea about any body, is apt
to suggest suspicions of there being something to conceal." He perfectly agreed with her:  and after walking together so long,
and thinking so much alike, Emma felt herself so well acquainted with him,
that she could hardly believe it to be only their second meeting. He was not exactly what she had expected; less of the man of the
world in some of his notions, less of the spoiled child of fortune,
therefore better than she had expected. His ideas seemed more moderate--
his feelings warmer. She was particularly struck by his manner
of considering Mr. Elton's house, which, as well as the church,
he would go and look at, and would not join them in finding much
fault with. No, he could not believe it a bad house; not such a house
as a man was to be pitied for having. If it were to be shared with
the woman he loved, he could not think any man to be pitied for having
that house. There must be ample room in it for every real comfort. The man must be a blockhead who wanted more. Mrs. Weston laughed, and said he did not know what he was talking about. Used only to a large house himself, and without ever thinking how many
advantages and accommodations were attached to its size, he could
be no judge of the privations inevitably belonging to a small one. But Emma, in her own mind, determined that he _did_ know what he
was talking about, and that he shewed a very amiable inclination
to settle early in life, and to marry, from worthy motives. He might not be aware of the inroads on domestic peace to be
occasioned by no housekeeper's room, or a bad butler's pantry,
but no doubt he did perfectly feel that Enscombe could not make
him happy, and that whenever he were attached, he would willingly
give up much of wealth to be allowed an early establishment. CHAPTER VII


Emma's very good opinion of Frank Churchill was a little shaken
the following day, by hearing that he was gone off to London,
merely to have his hair cut. A sudden freak seemed to have seized him
at breakfast, and he had sent for a chaise and set off, intending to
return to dinner, but with no more important view that appeared than
having his hair cut. There was certainly no harm in his travelling
sixteen miles twice over on such an errand; but there was an air
of foppery and nonsense in it which she could not approve. It did
not accord with the rationality of plan, the moderation in expense,
or even the unselfish warmth of heart, which she had believed herself
to discern in him yesterday. Vanity, extravagance, love of change,
restlessness of temper, which must be doing something, good or bad;
heedlessness as to the pleasure of his father and Mrs. Weston,
indifferent as to how his conduct might appear in general; he became
liable to all these charges. His father only called him a coxcomb,
and thought it a very good story; but that Mrs. Weston did not like it,
was clear enough, by her passing it over as quickly as possible,
and making no other comment than that "all young people would have
their little whims." With the exception of this little blot, Emma found that his visit
hitherto had given her friend only good ideas of him. Mrs. Weston
was very ready to say how attentive and pleasant a companion he
made himself--how much she saw to like in his disposition altogether. He appeared to have a very open temper--certainly a very cheerful
and lively one; she could observe nothing wrong in his notions,
a great deal decidedly right; he spoke of his uncle with warm regard,
was fond of talking of him--said he would be the best man in the
world if he were left to himself; and though there was no being
attached to the aunt, he acknowledged her kindness with gratitude,
and seemed to mean always to speak of her with respect. This was all very promising; and, but for such an unfortunate fancy
for having his hair cut, there was nothing to denote him unworthy
of the distinguished honour which her imagination had given him;
the honour, if not of being really in love with her, of being
at least very near it, and saved only by her own indifference--
(for still her resolution held of never marrying)--the honour, in short,
of being marked out for her by all their joint acquaintance. Mr. Weston, on his side, added a virtue to the account which must
have some weight. He gave her to understand that Frank admired
her extremely--thought her very beautiful and very charming;
and with so much to be said for him altogether, she found she must
not judge him harshly. As Mrs. Weston observed, "all young people
would have their little whims." There was one person among his new acquaintance in Surry, not so
leniently disposed. In general he was judged, throughout the parishes
of Donwell and Highbury, with great candour; liberal allowances
were made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man--
one who smiled so often and bowed so well; but there was one spirit
among them not to be softened, from its power of censure, by bows
or smiles--Mr. Knightley. The circumstance was told him at Hartfield;
for the moment, he was silent; but Emma heard him almost immediately
afterwards say to himself, over a newspaper he held in his hand,
"Hum! just the trifling, silly fellow I took him for." She had
half a mind to resent; but an instant's observation convinced
her that it was really said only to relieve his own feelings,
and not meant to provoke; and therefore she let it pass. Although in one instance the bearers of not good tidings,
Mr. and Mrs. Weston's visit this morning was in another respect
particularly opportune. Something occurred while they were
at Hartfield, to make Emma want their advice; and, which was
still more lucky, she wanted exactly the advice they gave. This was the occurrence:--The Coles had been settled some years
in Highbury, and were very good sort of people--friendly, liberal,
and unpretending; but, on the other hand, they were of low origin,
in trade, and only moderately genteel. On their first coming into
the country, they had lived in proportion to their income, quietly,
keeping little company, and that little unexpensively; but the last
year or two had brought them a considerable increase of means--
the house in town had yielded greater profits, and fortune in general
had smiled on them. With their wealth, their views increased;
their want of a larger house, their inclination for more company. They added to their house, to their number of servants,
to their expenses of every sort; and by this time were, in fortune
and style of living, second only to the family at Hartfield. Their love of society, and their new dining-room, prepared every body
for their keeping dinner-company; and a few parties, chiefly among
the single men, had already taken place. The regular and best
families Emma could hardly suppose they would presume to invite--
neither Donwell, nor Hartfield, nor Randalls. Nothing should
tempt _her_ to go, if they did; and she regretted that her father's
known habits would be giving her refusal less meaning than she
could wish. The Coles were very respectable in their way, but they
ought to be taught that it was not for them to arrange the terms
on which the superior families would visit them. This lesson,
she very much feared, they would receive only from herself;
she had little hope of Mr. Knightley, none of Mr. Weston. But she had made up her mind how to meet this presumption so many
weeks before it appeared, that when the insult came at last,
it found her very differently affected. Donwell and Randalls
had received their invitation, and none had come for her father
and herself; and Mrs. Weston's accounting for it with "I suppose
they will not take the liberty with you; they know you do not
dine out," was not quite sufficient. She felt that she should
like to have had the power of refusal; and afterwards, as the idea
of the party to be assembled there, consisting precisely of those
whose society was dearest to her, occurred again and again,
she did not know that she might not have been tempted to accept. Harriet was to be there in the evening, and the Bateses. They had
been speaking of it as they walked about Highbury the day before,
and Frank Churchill had most earnestly lamented her absence. Might not the evening end in a dance? had been a question of his. The bare possibility of it acted as a farther irritation on her spirits;
and her being left in solitary grandeur, even supposing the omission
to be intended as a compliment, was but poor comfort. It was the arrival of this very invitation while the Westons were
at Hartfield, which made their presence so acceptable; for though her
first remark, on reading it, was that "of course it must be declined,"
she so very soon proceeded to ask them what they advised her to do,
that their advice for her going was most prompt and successful. She owned that, considering every thing, she was not absolutely
without inclination for the party. The Coles expressed themselves
so properly--there was so much real attention in the manner of it--
so much consideration for her father. "They would have solicited the
honour earlier, but had been waiting the arrival of a folding-screen
from London, which they hoped might keep Mr. Woodhouse from any draught
of air, and therefore induce him the more readily to give them the
honour of his company." Upon the whole, she was very persuadable;
and it being briefly settled among themselves how it might be
done without neglecting his comfort--how certainly Mrs. Goddard,
if not Mrs. Bates, might be depended on for bearing him company--
Mr. Woodhouse was to be talked into an acquiescence of his daughter's
going out to dinner on a day now near at hand, and spending
the whole evening away from him. As for _his_ going, Emma did
not wish him to think it possible, the hours would be too late,
and the party too numerous. He was soon pretty well resigned. "I am not fond of dinner-visiting," said he--"I never was. No more is Emma. Late hours do not agree with us. I am sorry
Mr. and Mrs. Cole should have done it. I think it would be
much better if they would come in one afternoon next summer,
and take their tea with us--take us in their afternoon walk;
which they might do, as our hours are so reasonable, and yet get home
without being out in the damp of the evening. The dews of a summer
evening are what I would not expose any body to. However, as they
are so very desirous to have dear Emma dine with them, and as you
will both be there, and Mr. Knightley too, to take care of her,
I cannot wish to prevent it, provided the weather be what it ought,
neither damp, nor cold, nor windy." Then turning to Mrs. Weston,
with a look of gentle reproach--"Ah! Miss Taylor, if you had
not married, you would have staid at home with me." "Well, sir," cried Mr. Weston, "as I took Miss Taylor away,
it is incumbent on me to supply her place, if I can; and I will
step to Mrs. Goddard in a moment, if you wish it." But the idea of any thing to be done in a _moment_, was increasing,
not lessening, Mr. Woodhouse's agitation. The ladies knew better
how to allay it. Mr. Weston must be quiet, and every thing
deliberately arranged. With this treatment, Mr. Woodhouse was soon composed enough
for talking as usual. "He should be happy to see Mrs. Goddard. He had a great regard for Mrs. Goddard; and Emma should write a line,
and invite her. James could take the note. But first of all,
there must be an answer written to Mrs. Cole." "You will make my excuses, my dear, as civilly as possible. You will
say that I am quite an invalid, and go no where, and therefore must
decline their obliging invitation; beginning with my _compliments_,
of course. But you will do every thing right. I need not tell you
what is to be done. We must remember to let James know that the carriage
will be wanted on Tuesday. I shall have no fears for you with him. We have never been there above once since the new approach was made;
but still I have no doubt that James will take you very safely. And when you get there, you must tell him at what time you would
have him come for you again; and you had better name an early hour. You will not like staying late. You will get very tired when tea
is over." "But you would not wish me to come away before I am tired, papa?" "Oh! no, my love; but you will soon be tired. There will be
a great many people talking at once. You will not like the noise." "But, my dear sir," cried Mr. Weston, "if Emma comes away early,
it will be breaking up the party." "And no great harm if it does," said Mr. Woodhouse. "The sooner
every party breaks up, the better." "But you do not consider how it may appear to the Coles. Emma's going away directly after tea might be giving offence. They are good-natured people, and think little of their own claims;
but still they must feel that any body's hurrying away is no
great compliment; and Miss Woodhouse's doing it would be more thought
of than any other person's in the room. You would not wish to disappoint
and mortify the Coles, I am sure, sir; friendly, good sort of people
as ever lived, and who have been your neighbours these _ten_ years." "No, upon no account in the world, Mr. Weston; I am much obliged
to you for reminding me. I should be extremely sorry to be giving
them any pain. I know what worthy people they are. Perry tells
me that Mr. Cole never touches malt liquor. You would not think
it to look at him, but he is bilious--Mr. Cole is very bilious. No, I would not be the means of giving them any pain. My dear Emma,
we must consider this. I am sure, rather than run the risk of hurting
Mr. and Mrs. Cole, you would stay a little longer than you might wish. You will not regard being tired. You will be perfectly safe,
you know, among your friends." "Oh yes, papa. I have no fears at all for myself; and I should have
no scruples of staying as late as Mrs. Weston, but on your account. I am only afraid of your sitting up for me. I am not afraid
of your not being exceedingly comfortable with Mrs. Goddard. She loves piquet, you know; but when she is gone home, I am afraid
you will be sitting up by yourself, instead of going to bed at your
usual time--and the idea of that would entirely destroy my comfort. You must promise me not to sit up." He did, on the condition of some promises on her side:  such as that,
if she came home cold, she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly;
if hungry, that she would take something to eat; that her own maid
should sit up for her; and that Serle and the butler should see
that every thing were safe in the house, as usual. CHAPTER VIII


Frank Churchill came back again; and if he kept his father's
dinner waiting, it was not known at Hartfield; for Mrs. Weston
was too anxious for his being a favourite with Mr. Woodhouse,
to betray any imperfection which could be concealed. He came back, had had his hair cut, and laughed at himself with
a very good grace, but without seeming really at all ashamed
of what he had done. He had no reason to wish his hair longer,
to conceal any confusion of face; no reason to wish the money unspent,
to improve his spirits. He was quite as undaunted and as lively
as ever; and, after seeing him, Emma thus moralised to herself:--

"I do not know whether it ought to be so, but certainly silly things
do cease to be silly if they are done by sensible people in an
impudent way. Wickedness is always wickedness, but folly is not
always folly.--It depends upon the character of those who handle it. Mr. Knightley, he is _not_ a trifling, silly young man. If he were,
he would have done this differently. He would either have gloried
in the achievement, or been ashamed of it. There would have been
either the ostentation of a coxcomb, or the evasions of a mind too
weak to defend its own vanities.--No, I am perfectly sure that he
is not trifling or silly." With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again,
and for a longer time than hitherto; of judging of his general manners,
and by inference, of the meaning of his manners towards herself;
of guessing how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness
into her air; and of fancying what the observations of all those
might be, who were now seeing them together for the first time. She meant to be very happy, in spite of the scene being laid at
Mr. Cole's; and without being able to forget that among the failings
of Mr. Elton, even in the days of his favour, none had disturbed
her more than his propensity to dine with Mr. Cole. Her father's comfort was amply secured, Mrs. Bates as well as
Mrs. Goddard being able to come; and her last pleasing duty,
before she left the house, was to pay her respects to them as
they sat together after dinner; and while her father was fondly
noticing the beauty of her dress, to make the two ladies all
the amends in her power, by helping them to large slices of cake
and full glasses of wine, for whatever unwilling self-denial his
care of their constitution might have obliged them to practise
during the meal.--She had provided a plentiful dinner for them;
she wished she could know that they had been allowed to eat it. She followed another carriage to Mr. Cole's door; and was pleased
to see that it was Mr. Knightley's; for Mr. Knightley keeping
no horses, having little spare money and a great deal of health,
activity, and independence, was too apt, in Emma's opinion, to get
about as he could, and not use his carriage so often as became
the owner of Donwell Abbey. She had an opportunity now of speaking
her approbation while warm from her heart, for he stopped to hand her out. "This is coming as you should do," said she; "like a gentleman.--
I am quite glad to see you." He thanked her, observing, "How lucky that we should arrive at the same
moment! for, if we had met first in the drawing-room, I doubt whether
you would have discerned me to be more of a gentleman than usual.--
You might not have distinguished how I came, by my look or manner." "Yes I should, I am sure I should. There is always a look of
consciousness or bustle when people come in a way which they know
to be beneath them. You think you carry it off very well, I dare say,
but with you it is a sort of bravado, an air of affected unconcern;
I always observe it whenever I meet you under those circumstances. _Now_ you have nothing to try for. You are not afraid of being
supposed ashamed. You are not striving to look taller than any
body else. _Now_ I shall really be very happy to walk into the same
room with you." "Nonsensical girl!" was his reply, but not at all in anger. Emma had as much reason to be satisfied with the rest of the party
as with Mr. Knightley. She was received with a cordial respect
which could not but please, and given all the consequence she could
wish for. When the Westons arrived, the kindest looks of love,
the strongest of admiration were for her, from both husband and wife;
the son approached her with a cheerful eagerness which marked
her as his peculiar object, and at dinner she found him seated
by her--and, as she firmly believed, not without some dexterity
on his side. The party was rather large, as it included one other family, a proper
unobjectionable country family, whom the Coles had the advantage of
naming among their acquaintance, and the male part of Mr. Cox's family,
the lawyer of Highbury. The less worthy females were to come
in the evening, with Miss Bates, Miss Fairfax, and Miss Smith;
but already, at dinner, they were too numerous for any subject
of conversation to be general; and, while politics and Mr. Elton
were talked over, Emma could fairly surrender all her attention to
the pleasantness of her neighbour. The first remote sound to which
she felt herself obliged to attend, was the name of Jane Fairfax. Mrs. Cole seemed to be relating something of her that was expected to be
very interesting. She listened, and found it well worth listening to. That very dear part of Emma, her fancy, received an amusing supply. Mrs. Cole was telling that she had been calling on Miss Bates,
and as soon as she entered the room had been struck by the sight
of a pianoforte--a very elegant looking instrument--not a grand,
but a large-sized square pianoforte; and the substance of the story,
the end of all the dialogue which ensued of surprize, and inquiry,
and congratulations on her side, and explanations on Miss Bates's, was,
that this pianoforte had arrived from Broadwood's the day before,
to the great astonishment of both aunt and niece--entirely unexpected;
that at first, by Miss Bates's account, Jane herself was quite at
a loss, quite bewildered to think who could possibly have ordered it--
but now, they were both perfectly satisfied that it could be from only
one quarter;--of course it must be from Colonel Campbell. "One can suppose nothing else," added Mrs. Cole, "and I was only
surprized that there could ever have been a doubt. But Jane,
it seems, had a letter from them very lately, and not a word was said
about it. She knows their ways best; but I should not consider their
silence as any reason for their not meaning to make the present. They might chuse to surprize her." Mrs. Cole had many to agree with her; every body who spoke on the
subject was equally convinced that it must come from Colonel Campbell,
and equally rejoiced that such a present had been made; and there
were enough ready to speak to allow Emma to think her own way,
and still listen to Mrs. Cole. "I declare, I do not know when I have heard any thing that has given
me more satisfaction!--It always has quite hurt me that Jane Fairfax,
who plays so delightfully, should not have an instrument. It seemed quite a shame, especially considering how many houses
there are where fine instruments are absolutely thrown away. This is like giving ourselves a slap, to be sure! and it was
but yesterday I was telling Mr. Cole, I really was ashamed
to look at our new grand pianoforte in the drawing-room, while I
do not know one note from another, and our little girls, who are
but just beginning, perhaps may never make any thing of it;
and there is poor Jane Fairfax, who is mistress of music, has not
any thing of the nature of an instrument, not even the pitifullest
old spinet in the world, to amuse herself with.--I was saying this
to Mr. Cole but yesterday, and he quite agreed with me; only he
is so particularly fond of music that he could not help indulging
himself in the purchase, hoping that some of our good neighbours might
be so obliging occasionally to put it to a better use than we can;
and that really is the reason why the instrument was bought--
or else I am sure we ought to be ashamed of it.--We are in great
hopes that Miss Woodhouse may be prevailed with to try it this evening." Miss Woodhouse made the proper acquiescence; and finding that nothing
more was to be entrapped from any communication of Mrs. Cole's,
turned to Frank Churchill. "Why do you smile?" said she. "Nay, why do you?" "Me!--I suppose I smile for pleasure at Colonel Campbell's being
so rich and so liberal.--It is a handsome present." "Very." "I rather wonder that it was never made before." "Perhaps Miss Fairfax has never been staying here so long before." "Or that he did not give her the use of their own instrument--
which must now be shut up in London, untouched by any body." "That is a grand pianoforte, and he might think it too large
for Mrs. Bates's house." "You may _say_ what you chuse--but your countenance testifies
that your _thoughts_ on this subject are very much like mine." "I do not know. I rather believe you are giving me more credit for
acuteness than I deserve. I smile because you smile, and shall probably
suspect whatever I find you suspect; but at present I do not see what
there is to question. If Colonel Campbell is not the person, who can be?" "What do you say to Mrs. Dixon?" "Mrs. Dixon! very true indeed. I had not thought of Mrs. Dixon. She must know as well as her father, how acceptable an instrument
would be; and perhaps the mode of it, the mystery, the surprize,
is more like a young woman's scheme than an elderly man's. It
is Mrs. Dixon, I dare say. I told you that your suspicions would
guide mine." "If so, you must extend your suspicions and comprehend _Mr_. Dixon
in them." "Mr. Dixon.--Very well. Yes, I immediately perceive that it must
be the joint present of Mr. and Mrs. Dixon. We were speaking the
other day, you know, of his being so warm an admirer of her performance." "Yes, and what you told me on that head, confirmed an idea which I
had entertained before.--I do not mean to reflect upon the good
intentions of either Mr. Dixon or Miss Fairfax, but I cannot help
suspecting either that, after making his proposals to her friend,
he had the misfortune to fall in love with _her_, or that he became
conscious of a little attachment on her side. One might guess
twenty things without guessing exactly the right; but I am sure
there must be a particular cause for her chusing to come to Highbury
instead of going with the Campbells to Ireland. Here, she must be
leading a life of privation and penance; there it would have been
all enjoyment. As to the pretence of trying her native air, I look
upon that as a mere excuse.--In the summer it might have passed;
but what can any body's native air do for them in the months
of January, February, and March? Good fires and carriages would
be much more to the purpose in most cases of delicate health, and I
dare say in her's. I do not require you to adopt all my suspicions,
though you make so noble a profession of doing it, but I honestly
tell you what they are." "And, upon my word, they have an air of great probability. Mr. Dixon's preference of her music to her friend's, I can answer
for being very decided." "And then, he saved her life. Did you ever hear of that?--
A water party; and by some accident she was falling overboard. He caught her." "He did. I was there--one of the party." "Were you really?--Well!--But you observed nothing of course,
for it seems to be a new idea to you.--If I had been there, I think
I should have made some discoveries." "I dare say you would; but I, simple I, saw nothing but the fact,
that Miss Fairfax was nearly dashed from the vessel and that Mr. Dixon
caught her.--It was the work of a moment. And though the consequent
shock and alarm was very great and much more durable--indeed I
believe it was half an hour before any of us were comfortable again--
yet that was too general a sensation for any thing of peculiar
anxiety to be observable. I do not mean to say, however, that you
might not have made discoveries." The conversation was here interrupted. They were called on to share
in the awkwardness of a rather long interval between the courses,
and obliged to be as formal and as orderly as the others; but when
the table was again safely covered, when every corner dish was placed
exactly right, and occupation and ease were generally restored,
Emma said,

"The arrival of this pianoforte is decisive with me. I wanted to know
a little more, and this tells me quite enough. Depend upon it,
we shall soon hear that it is a present from Mr. and Mrs. Dixon." "And if the Dixons should absolutely deny all knowledge of it we
must conclude it to come from the Campbells." "No, I am sure it is not from the Campbells. Miss Fairfax knows it
is not from the Campbells, or they would have been guessed at first. She would not have been puzzled, had she dared fix on them. I may not have convinced you perhaps, but I am perfectly convinced
myself that Mr. Dixon is a principal in the business." "Indeed you injure me if you suppose me unconvinced. Your reasonings
carry my judgment along with them entirely. At first, while I
supposed you satisfied that Colonel Campbell was the giver, I saw
it only as paternal kindness, and thought it the most natural thing
in the world. But when you mentioned Mrs. Dixon, I felt how much more
probable that it should be the tribute of warm female friendship. And now I can see it in no other light than as an offering of love." There was no occasion to press the matter farther. The conviction
seemed real; he looked as if he felt it. She said no more,
other subjects took their turn; and the rest of the dinner passed away;
the dessert succeeded, the children came in, and were talked
to and admired amid the usual rate of conversation; a few clever
things said, a few downright silly, but by much the larger proportion
neither the one nor the other--nothing worse than everyday remarks,
dull repetitions, old news, and heavy jokes. The ladies had not been long in the drawing-room, before the other ladies,
in their different divisions, arrived. Emma watched the entree of her
own particular little friend; and if she could not exult in her dignity
and grace, she could not only love the blooming sweetness and the
artless manner, but could most heartily rejoice in that light, cheerful,
unsentimental disposition which allowed her so many alleviations
of pleasure, in the midst of the pangs of disappointed affection. There she sat--and who would have guessed how many tears she had
been lately shedding? To be in company, nicely dressed herself
and seeing others nicely dressed, to sit and smile and look pretty,
and say nothing, was enough for the happiness of the present hour. Jane Fairfax did look and move superior; but Emma suspected she
might have been glad to change feelings with Harriet, very glad
to have purchased the mortification of having loved--yes, of having
loved even Mr. Elton in vain--by the surrender of all the dangerous
pleasure of knowing herself beloved by the husband of her friend. In so large a party it was not necessary that Emma should approach her. She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte, she felt too much
in the secret herself, to think the appearance of curiosity
or interest fair, and therefore purposely kept at a distance;
but by the others, the subject was almost immediately introduced,
and she saw the blush of consciousness with which congratulations
were received, the blush of guilt which accompanied the name of "my
excellent friend Colonel Campbell." Mrs. Weston, kind-hearted and musical, was particularly interested
by the circumstance, and Emma could not help being amused at her
perseverance in dwelling on the subject; and having so much to ask
and to say as to tone, touch, and pedal, totally unsuspicious
of that wish of saying as little about it as possible, which she
plainly read in the fair heroine's countenance. They were soon joined by some of the gentlemen; and the very first of the
early was Frank Churchill. In he walked, the first and the handsomest;
and after paying his compliments en passant to Miss Bates and
her niece, made his way directly to the opposite side of the circle,
where sat Miss Woodhouse; and till he could find a seat by her,
would not sit at all. Emma divined what every body present must
be thinking. She was his object, and every body must perceive it. She introduced him to her friend, Miss Smith, and, at convenient
moments afterwards, heard what each thought of the other. "He had
never seen so lovely a face, and was delighted with her naivete." And she, "Only to be sure it was paying him too great a compliment,
but she did think there were some looks a little like Mr. Elton." Emma restrained her indignation, and only turned from her in silence. Smiles of intelligence passed between her and the gentleman on first
glancing towards Miss Fairfax; but it was most prudent to avoid speech. He told her that he had been impatient to leave the dining-room--
hated sitting long--was always the first to move when he could--
that his father, Mr. Knightley, Mr. Cox, and Mr. Cole, were left
very busy over parish business--that as long as he had staid,
however, it had been pleasant enough, as he had found them in general
a set of gentlemanlike, sensible men; and spoke so handsomely of
Highbury altogether--thought it so abundant in agreeable families--
that Emma began to feel she had been used to despise the place
rather too much. She questioned him as to the society in Yorkshire--
the extent of the neighbourhood about Enscombe, and the sort;
and could make out from his answers that, as far as Enscombe
was concerned, there was very little going on, that their visitings
were among a range of great families, none very near; and that even
when days were fixed, and invitations accepted, it was an even
chance that Mrs. Churchill were not in health and spirits for going;
that they made a point of visiting no fresh person; and that,
though he had his separate engagements, it was not without difficulty,
without considerable address _at_ _times_, that he could get away,
or introduce an acquaintance for a night. She saw that Enscombe could not satisfy, and that Highbury,
taken at its best, might reasonably please a young man who had more
retirement at home than he liked. His importance at Enscombe was
very evident. He did not boast, but it naturally betrayed itself,
that he had persuaded his aunt where his uncle could do nothing,
and on her laughing and noticing it, he owned that he believed (excepting
one or two points) he could _with_ _time_ persuade her to any thing. One of those points on which his influence failed, he then mentioned. He had wanted very much to go abroad--had been very eager indeed
to be allowed to travel--but she would not hear of it. This had
happened the year before. _Now_, he said, he was beginning to have
no longer the same wish. The unpersuadable point, which he did not mention, Emma guessed
to be good behaviour to his father. "I have made a most wretched discovery," said he, after a short pause.--
"I have been here a week to-morrow--half my time. I never knew
days fly so fast. A week to-morrow!--And I have hardly begun to
enjoy myself. But just got acquainted with Mrs. Weston, and others!--
I hate the recollection." "Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day,
out of so few, in having your hair cut." "No," said he, smiling, "that is no subject of regret at all. I have no pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself
fit to be seen." The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herself
obliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr. Cole. When Mr. Cole had moved away, and her attention could be restored
as before, she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room
at Miss Fairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite. "What is the matter?" said she. He started. "Thank you for rousing me," he replied. "I believe
I have been very rude; but really Miss Fairfax has done her hair
in so odd a way--so very odd a way--that I cannot keep my eyes
from her. I never saw any thing so outree!--Those curls!--This must
be a fancy of her own. I see nobody else looking like her!--
I must go and ask her whether it is an Irish fashion. Shall I?--
Yes, I will--I declare I will--and you shall see how she takes it;--
whether she colours." He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss
Fairfax, and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady,
as he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly
in front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing. Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs. Weston. "This is the luxury of a large party," said she:--"one can get
near every body, and say every thing. My dear Emma, I am longing
to talk to you. I have been making discoveries and forming plans,
just like yourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh. Do you know how Miss Bates and her niece came here?" "How?--They were invited, were not they?" "Oh! yes--but how they were conveyed hither?--the manner of their coming?" "They walked, I conclude. How else could they come?" "Very true.--Well, a little while ago it occurred to me how very sad
it would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again, late at night,
and cold as the nights are now. And as I looked at her, though I
never saw her appear to more advantage, it struck me that she
was heated, and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold. Poor girl! I could not bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr. Weston
came into the room, and I could get at him, I spoke to him about
the carriage. You may guess how readily he came into my wishes;
and having his approbation, I made my way directly to Miss Bates,
to assure her that the carriage would be at her service before it took
us home; for I thought it would be making her comfortable at once. Good soul! she was as grateful as possible, you may be sure. `Nobody was ever so fortunate as herself!' --but with many,
many thanks--`there was no occasion to trouble us, for Mr. Knightley's
carriage had brought, and was to take them home again.' I was
quite surprized;--very glad, I am sure; but really quite surprized. Such a very kind attention--and so thoughtful an attention!--
the sort of thing that so few men would think of. And, in short,
from knowing his usual ways, I am very much inclined to think
that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all. I do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself,
and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them." "Very likely," said Emma--"nothing more likely. I know no man
more likely than Mr. Knightley to do the sort of thing--to do any
thing really good-natured, useful, considerate, or benevolent. He is not a gallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this,
considering Jane Fairfax's ill-health, would appear a case
of humanity to him;--and for an act of unostentatious kindness,
there is nobody whom I would fix on more than on Mr. Knightley. I know he had horses to-day--for we arrived together; and I laughed at
him about it, but he said not a word that could betray." "Well," said Mrs. Weston, smiling, "you give him credit for
more simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do;
for while Miss Bates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head,
and I have never been able to get it out again. The more I think
of it, the more probable it appears. In short, I have made a match
between Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax. See the consequence
of keeping you company!--What do you say to it?" "Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax!" exclaimed Emma. "Dear Mrs. Weston,
how could you think of such a thing?--Mr. Knightley!--Mr. Knightley
must not marry!--You would not have little Henry cut out from Donwell?--
Oh! no, no, Henry must have Donwell. I cannot at all consent to
Mr. Knightley's marrying; and I am sure it is not at all likely. I am amazed that you should think of such a thing." "My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it. I do not want the match--I do not want to injure dear little Henry--
but the idea has been given me by circumstances; and if Mr. Knightley
really wished to marry, you would not have him refrain on Henry's
account, a boy of six years old, who knows nothing of the matter?" "Yes, I would. I could not bear to have Henry supplanted.--
Mr. Knightley marry!--No, I have never had such an idea, and I
cannot adopt it now. And Jane Fairfax, too, of all women!" "Nay, she has always been a first favourite with him, as you
very well know." "But the imprudence of such a match!" "I am not speaking of its prudence; merely its probability." "I see no probability in it, unless you have any better foundation
than what you mention. His good-nature, his humanity, as I tell you,
would be quite enough to account for the horses. He has a great
regard for the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax--
and is always glad to shew them attention. My dear Mrs. Weston,
do not take to match-making. You do it very ill.  Jane Fairfax mistress
of the Abbey!--Oh! no, no;--every feeling revolts. For his own sake,
I would not have him do so mad a thing." "Imprudent, if you please--but not mad. Excepting inequality of fortune,
and perhaps a little disparity of age, I can see nothing unsuitable." "But Mr. Knightley does not want to marry. I am sure he has not the
least idea of it. Do not put it into his head. Why should he marry?--
He is as happy as possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep,
and his library, and all the parish to manage; and he is extremely
fond of his brother's children. He has no occasion to marry,
either to fill up his time or his heart." "My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so; but if he really
loves Jane Fairfax--"

"Nonsense! He does not care about Jane Fairfax. In the way
of love, I am sure he does not. He would do any good to her,
or her family; but--"

"Well," said Mrs. Weston, laughing, "perhaps the greatest good he
could do them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home." "If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself;
a very shameful and degrading connexion. How would he bear to have
Miss Bates belonging to him?--To have her haunting the Abbey,
and thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane?--
`So very kind and obliging!--But he always had been such a very
kind neighbour!' And then fly off, through half a sentence,
to her mother's old petticoat. `Not that it was such a very old
petticoat either--for still it would last a great while--and, indeed,
she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all very strong.'" "For shame, Emma! Do not mimic her. You divert me against
my conscience. And, upon my word, I do not think Mr. Knightley would
be much disturbed by Miss Bates. Little things do not irritate him. She might talk on; and if he wanted to say any thing himself, he would
only talk louder, and drown her voice. But the question is not,
whether it would be a bad connexion for him, but whether he wishes it;
and I think he does. I have heard him speak, and so must you,
so very highly of Jane Fairfax! The interest he takes in her--
his anxiety about her health--his concern that she should have no
happier prospect! I have heard him express himself so warmly on
those points!--Such an admirer of her performance on the pianoforte,
and of her voice! I have heard him say that he could listen to her
for ever. Oh! and I had almost forgotten one idea that occurred
to me--this pianoforte that has been sent here by somebody--
though we have all been so well satisfied to consider it a present
from the Campbells, may it not be from Mr. Knightley? I cannot
help suspecting him. I think he is just the person to do it,
even without being in love." "Then it can be no argument to prove that he is in love. But I do not think it is at all a likely thing for him to do. Mr. Knightley does nothing mysteriously." "I have heard him lamenting her having no instrument repeatedly;
oftener than I should suppose such a circumstance would, in the common
course of things, occur to him." "Very well; and if he had intended to give her one, he would have
told her so." "There might be scruples of delicacy, my dear Emma. I have a very
strong notion that it comes from him. I am sure he was particularly
silent when Mrs. Cole told us of it at dinner." "You take up an idea, Mrs. Weston, and run away with it; as you have
many a time reproached me with doing. I see no sign of attachment--
I believe nothing of the pianoforte--and proof only shall convince
me that Mr. Knightley has any thought of marrying Jane Fairfax." They combated the point some time longer in the same way; Emma rather
gaining ground over the mind of her friend; for Mrs. Weston was
the most used of the two to yield; till a little bustle in the room
shewed them that tea was over, and the instrument in preparation;--
and at the same moment Mr. Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse
would do them the honour of trying it. Frank Churchill, of whom,
in the eagerness of her conversation with Mrs. Weston, she had been
seeing nothing, except that he had found a seat by Miss Fairfax,
followed Mr. Cole, to add his very pressing entreaties; and as,
in every respect, it suited Emma best to lead, she gave a very
proper compliance. She knew the limitations of her own powers too well to attempt
more than she could perform with credit; she wanted neither taste
nor spirit in the little things which are generally acceptable,
and could accompany her own voice well. One accompaniment to her song
took her agreeably by surprize--a second, slightly but correctly
taken by Frank Churchill. Her pardon was duly begged at the close
of the song, and every thing usual followed. He was accused
of having a delightful voice, and a perfect knowledge of music;
which was properly denied; and that he knew nothing of the matter,
and had no voice at all, roundly asserted. They sang together
once more; and Emma would then resign her place to Miss Fairfax,
whose performance, both vocal and instrumental, she never could
attempt to conceal from herself, was infinitely superior to her own. With mixed feelings, she seated herself at a little distance from the
numbers round the instrument, to listen. Frank Churchill sang again. They had sung together once or twice, it appeared, at Weymouth. But the sight of Mr. Knightley among the most attentive, soon drew
away half Emma's mind; and she fell into a train of thinking
on the subject of Mrs. Weston's suspicions, to which the sweet
sounds of the united voices gave only momentary interruptions. Her objections to Mr. Knightley's marrying did not in the least subside. She could see nothing but evil in it. It would be a great
disappointment to Mr. John Knightley; consequently to Isabella. A real injury to the children--a most mortifying change,
and material loss to them all;--a very great deduction from her
father's daily comfort--and, as to herself, she could not at all
endure the idea of Jane Fairfax at Donwell Abbey. A Mrs. Knightley
for them all to give way to!--No--Mr. Knightley must never marry. Little Henry must remain the heir of Donwell. Presently Mr. Knightley looked back, and came and sat down by her. They talked at first only of the performance. His admiration
was certainly very warm; yet she thought, but for Mrs. Weston,
it would not have struck her. As a sort of touchstone, however,
she began to speak of his kindness in conveying the aunt and niece;
and though his answer was in the spirit of cutting the matter short,
she believed it to indicate only his disinclination to dwell on any
kindness of his own. "I often feel concern," said she, "that I dare not make our carriage
more useful on such occasions. It is not that I am without the wish;
but you know how impossible my father would deem it that James
should put-to for such a purpose." "Quite out of the question, quite out of the question," he replied;--
"but you must often wish it, I am sure." And he smiled with such
seeming pleasure at the conviction, that she must proceed another step. "This present from the Campbells," said she--"this pianoforte
is very kindly given." "Yes," he replied, and without the smallest apparent embarrassment.--
"But they would have done better had they given her notice of it. Surprizes are foolish things. The pleasure is not enhanced, and the
inconvenience is often considerable. I should have expected better
judgment in Colonel Campbell." From that moment, Emma could have taken her oath that Mr. Knightley
had had no concern in giving the instrument. But whether he
were entirely free from peculiar attachment--whether there
were no actual preference--remained a little longer doubtful. Towards the end of Jane's second song, her voice grew thick. "That will do," said he, when it was finished, thinking aloud--
"you have sung quite enough for one evening--now be quiet." Another song, however, was soon begged for. "One more;--they would
not fatigue Miss Fairfax on any account, and would only ask for
one more." And Frank Churchill was heard to say, "I think you could
manage this without effort; the first part is so very trifling. The strength of the song falls on the second." Mr. Knightley grew angry. "That fellow," said he, indignantly, "thinks of nothing but shewing
off his own voice. This must not be." And touching Miss Bates,
who at that moment passed near--"Miss Bates, are you mad, to let
your niece sing herself hoarse in this manner? Go, and interfere. They have no mercy on her." Miss Bates, in her real anxiety for Jane, could hardly stay even
to be grateful, before she stept forward and put an end to all
farther singing. Here ceased the concert part of the evening,
for Miss Woodhouse and Miss Fairfax were the only young lady performers;
but soon (within five minutes) the proposal of dancing--
originating nobody exactly knew where--was so effectually promoted
by Mr. and Mrs. Cole, that every thing was rapidly clearing away,
to give proper space. Mrs. Weston, capital in her country-dances,
was seated, and beginning an irresistible waltz; and Frank Churchill,
coming up with most becoming gallantry to Emma, had secured her hand,
and led her up to the top. While waiting till the other young people could pair themselves off,
Emma found time, in spite of the compliments she was receiving on her
voice and her taste, to look about, and see what became of Mr. Knightley. This would be a trial. He was no dancer in general. If he were to be
very alert in engaging Jane Fairfax now, it might augur something. There was no immediate appearance. No; he was talking to Mrs. Cole--
he was looking on unconcerned; Jane was asked by somebody else,
and he was still talking to Mrs. Cole. Emma had no longer an alarm for Henry; his interest was yet safe;
and she led off the dance with genuine spirit and enjoyment. Not more than five couple could be mustered; but the rarity and the
suddenness of it made it very delightful, and she found herself well
matched in a partner. They were a couple worth looking at. Two dances, unfortunately, were all that could be allowed. It was growing late, and Miss Bates became anxious to get home,
on her mother's account. After some attempts, therefore, to be
permitted to begin again, they were obliged to thank Mrs. Weston,
look sorrowful, and have done. "Perhaps it is as well," said Frank Churchill, as he attended Emma
to her carriage. "I must have asked Miss Fairfax, and her languid
dancing would not have agreed with me, after your's." CHAPTER IX


Emma did not repent her condescension in going to the Coles. The visit afforded her many pleasant recollections the next day;
and all that she might be supposed to have lost on the side
of dignified seclusion, must be amply repaid in the splendour
of popularity. She must have delighted the Coles--worthy people,
who deserved to be made happy!--And left a name behind her that would
not soon die away. Perfect happiness, even in memory, is not common; and there were
two points on which she was not quite easy. She doubted whether
she had not transgressed the duty of woman by woman, in betraying
her suspicions of Jane Fairfax's feelings to Frank Churchill. It was hardly right; but it had been so strong an idea, that it
would escape her, and his submission to all that she told,
was a compliment to her penetration, which made it difficult
for her to be quite certain that she ought to have held her tongue. The other circumstance of regret related also to Jane Fairfax;
and there she had no doubt. She did unfeignedly and unequivocally
regret the inferiority of her own playing and singing. She did
most heartily grieve over the idleness of her childhood--and sat
down and practised vigorously an hour and a half. She was then interrupted by Harriet's coming in; and if Harriet's
praise could have satisfied her, she might soon have been comforted. "Oh! if I could but play as well as you and Miss Fairfax!" "Don't class us together, Harriet. My playing is no more like
her's, than a lamp is like sunshine." "Oh! dear--I think you play the best of the two. I think you play
quite as well as she does. I am sure I had much rather hear you. Every body last night said how well you played." "Those who knew any thing about it, must have felt the difference. The truth is, Harriet, that my playing is just good enough to be praised,
but Jane Fairfax's is much beyond it." "Well, I always shall think that you play quite as well as she does,
or that if there is any difference nobody would ever find it out. Mr. Cole said how much taste you had; and Mr. Frank Churchill talked
a great deal about your taste, and that he valued taste much more
than execution." "Ah! but Jane Fairfax has them both, Harriet." "Are you sure? I saw she had execution, but I did not know she had
any taste. Nobody talked about it. And I hate Italian singing.--
There is no understanding a word of it. Besides, if she does play
so very well, you know, it is no more than she is obliged to do,
because she will have to teach. The Coxes were wondering last night
whether she would get into any great family. How did you think the
Coxes looked?" "Just as they always do--very vulgar." "They told me something," said Harriet rather hesitatingly;"
but it is nothing of any consequence." Emma was obliged to ask what they had told her, though fearful
of its producing Mr. Elton. "They told me--that Mr. Martin dined with them last Saturday." "Oh!" "He came to their father upon some business, and he asked him
to stay to dinner." "Oh!" "They talked a great deal about him, especially Anne Cox. I do not know what she meant, but she asked me if I thought I
should go and stay there again next summer." "She meant to be impertinently curious, just as such an Anne Cox
should be." "She said he was very agreeable the day he dined there. He sat
by her at dinner. Miss Nash thinks either of the Coxes would
be very glad to marry him." "Very likely.--I think they are, without exception, the most vulgar
girls in Highbury." Harriet had business at Ford's.--Emma thought it most prudent to go
with her. Another accidental meeting with the Martins was possible,
and in her present state, would be dangerous. Harriet, tempted by every thing and swayed by half a word, was always
very long at a purchase; and while she was still hanging over muslins
and changing her mind, Emma went to the door for amusement.--Much could
not be hoped from the traffic of even the busiest part of Highbury;--
Mr. Perry walking hastily by, Mr. William Cox letting himself in at
the office-door, Mr. Cole's carriage-horses returning from exercise,
or a stray letter-boy on an obstinate mule, were the liveliest
objects she could presume to expect; and when her eyes fell only on
the butcher with his tray, a tidy old woman travelling homewards from
shop with her full basket, two curs quarrelling over a dirty bone,
and a string of dawdling children round the baker's little bow-window
eyeing the gingerbread, she knew she had no reason to complain,
and was amused enough; quite enough still to stand at the door. A mind lively and at ease, can do with seeing nothing, and can see
nothing that does not answer. She looked down the Randalls road. The scene enlarged;
two persons appeared; Mrs. Weston and her son-in-law; they were
walking into Highbury;--to Hartfield of course. They were stopping,
however, in the first place at Mrs. Bates's; whose house was
a little nearer Randalls than Ford's; and had all but knocked,
when Emma caught their eye.--Immediately they crossed the road
and came forward to her; and the agreeableness of yesterday's
engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting. Mrs. Weston informed her that she was going to call on the Bateses,
in order to hear the new instrument. "For my companion tells me," said she, "that I absolutely promised
Miss Bates last night, that I would come this morning. I was
not aware of it myself. I did not know that I had fixed a day,
but as he says I did, I am going now." "And while Mrs. Weston pays her visit, I may be allowed, I hope,"
said Frank Churchill, "to join your party and wait for her at Hartfield--
if you are going home." Mrs. Weston was disappointed. "I thought you meant to go with me.