But, alas! they were not yet at liberty. The idea of Dr. Middleton, and
the dread of his vengeance, smote their hearts. When the rebels had sent
an ambassador with their surrender, they stood in pale and silent
suspense, waiting for their doom. "Ah!" said Fisher, looking up at the broken panes in the windows, "the
doctor will think the most of THAT--he'll never forgive us for that." "Hush! here he comes!" His steady step was heard approaching nearer and
nearer. Archer threw open the door, and Dr. Middleton entered. Fisher
instantly fell on his knees. "It is no delight to me to see people on their knees. Stand up, Mr.
Fisher. I hope you are all conscious that you have done wrong?" "Sir," said Archer, "they are conscious that they have done wrong, and so
am I.  I am the ringleader. Punish me as you think proper. I submit. Your punishments--your vengeance ought to fall on me alone!" "Sir," said Dr. Middleton, calmly, "I perceive that whatever else you may
have learned in the course of your education, you have not been taught
the meaning of the word punishment. Punishment and vengeance do not with
us mean the same thing. PUNISHMENT is pain given, with the reasonable
hope of preventing those on whom it is inflicted from doing, IN FUTURE,
what will hurt themselves or others. VENGEANCE never looks to the
FUTURE, but is the expression of anger for an injury that is past. I
feel no anger; you have done me no injury." Here many of the little boys looked timidly up to the windows. "Yes, I
see that you have broken my windows; that is a small evil." "Oh, sir! How good! How merciful!" exclaimed those who had been most
panic-struck. "He forgives us!" "Stay," resumed Dr. Middleton; "I cannot forgive you. I shall never
revenge, but it is my duty to punish. You have rebelled against the just
authority which is necessary to conduct and govern you whilst you have
not sufficient reason to govern and conduct yourselves. Without
obedience to the laws," added he, turning to Archer, "as men, you cannot
be suffered in society. You, sir, think yourself a man, I observe; and
you think it the part of a man not to submit to the will of another. I
have no pleasure in making others, whether men or children, submit to my
WILL; but my reason and experience are superior to yours. Your parents
at least think so, or they would not have intrusted me with the care of
your education. As long as they do intrust you to my care, and as long
as I have any hopes of making you wiser and better by punishment, I shall
steadily inflict it, whenever I judge it to be necessary, and I judge it
to be necessary NOW. This is a long sermon, Mr. Archer, not preached to
show my own eloquence, but to convince your understanding. Now, as to
your punishment!" "Name it, sir," said Archer;  "whatever it is, I will cheerfully submit
to it." "Name it yourself," said Dr. Middleton, "and show me that you now
understand the nature of punishment." Archer, proud to be treated like a reasonable creature, and sorry that he
had behaved like a foolish schoolboy, was silent for some time, but at
length replied, "That he would rather not name his own punishment." He
repeated, however, that he trusted he should bear it well, whatever it
might be. "I shall, then," said Dr. Middleton, "deprive you, for two months, of
pocket-money, as you have had too much, and have made a bad use of it." "Sir," said Archer, "I brought five guineas with me to school. This
guinea is all that I have left." Dr. Middleton received the guinea which Archer offered him with a look of
approbation, and told him that it should be applied to the repairs of the
schoolroom. The rest of the boys waited in silence for the doctor's
sentence against them, but not with those looks of abject fear with which
boys usually expect the sentence of a schoolmaster. "You shall return from the playground, all of you," said Dr. Middleton,
"one quarter of an hour sooner, for two months to come, than the rest of
your companions. A bell shall ring at the appointed time. I give you an
opportunity of recovering my confidence by your punctuality." "Oh, sir! we will come the instant, the very instant the bell rings; you
shall have confidence in us," cried they, eagerly. "I deserve your confidence, I hope," said Dr. Middleton; "for it is my
first wish to make you all happy. You do not know the pain that it has
cost me to deprive you of food for so many hours." Here the boys, with one accord, ran to the place where they had deposited
their last supplies. Archer delivered them up to the doctor, proud to
show that they were not reduced to obedience merely by necessity. "The reason," resumed Dr. Middleton, having now returned to the usual
benignity of his manner--"the reason why I desired that none of you
should go to that building," pointing out of the window, "was this:--I
had been informed that a gang of gipsies had slept there the night before
I spoke to you, one of whom was dangerously ill of a putrid fever. I did
not choose to mention my reason to you or your friends. I have had the
place cleaned, and you may return to it when you please. The gipsies
were yesterday removed from the town." "De Grey, you were in the right," whispered Archer, "and it was I that
was UNJUST." "The old woman," continued the doctor, "whom you employed to buy food,
has escaped the fever, but she has not escaped a gaol, whither she was
sent yesterday, for having defrauded you of your money. "Mr. Fisher," said Dr. Middleton, "as to you, I shall not punish you; I
have no hope of making you either wiser or better. Do you know this
paper?" --the paper appeared to be a bill for candles and a tinder-box. "I desired him to buy those things, sir," said Archer, colouring. "And did you desire him not to pay for them?" "No," said Archer, "he had half a crown on purpose to pay for them." "I know he had, but he chose to apply it to his private use, and gave it
to the gipsy to buy twelve buns for his own eating. To obtain credit for
the tinder-box and candles, he made use of THIS name," said he, turning
to the other side of the bill, and pointing to De Grey's name, which was
written at the end of a copy of one of De Grey's exercises. "I assure you, sir--" cried Archer. "You need not assure me, sir," said Dr. Middleton; "I cannot suspect a
boy of your temper of having any part in so base an action. When the
people in the shop refused to let Mr. Fisher have the things without
paying for them, he made use of De Grey's name, who was known there. Suspecting some mischief, however, from the purchase of the tinder-box,
the shopkeeper informed me of the circumstance. Nothing in this whole
business gave me half so much pain as I felt, for a moment, when I
suspected that De Grey was concerned in it." A loud cry, in which
Archer's voice was heard most distinctly, declared De Grey's innocence. Dr. Middleton looked round at their eager, honest faces, with benevolent
approbation. "Archer," said he, taking him by the hand, "I am heartily
glad to see that you have got the better of your party spirit. I wish
you may keep such a friend as you have now beside you; one such friend is
worth two such parties. As for you, Mr. Fisher, depart; you must never
return hither again." In vain he solicited Archer and De Grey to
intercede for him. Everybody turned away with contempt; and he sneaked
out, whimpering in a doleful voice, "What shall I say to my Aunt
Barbara?" THE BRACELETS. In a beautiful and retired part of England lived Mrs. Villars, a lady
whose accurate understanding, benevolent heart, and steady temper
peculiarly fitted her for the most difficult, as well as most important,
of all occupations--the education of youth. This task she had
undertaken; and twenty young persons were put under her care, with the
perfect confidence of their parents. No young people could be happier;
they were good and gay, emulous, but not envious of each other; for Mrs.
Villars was impartially just; her praise they felt to be the reward of
merit, and her blame they knew to be the necessary consequence of ill-
conduct. To the one, therefore, they patiently submitted, and in the
other consciously rejoiced. They rose with fresh cheerfulness in the
morning, eager to pursue their various occupations. They returned in the
evening with renewed ardour to their amusements, and retired to rest
satisfied with themselves and pleased with each other. Nothing so much contributed to preserve a spirit of emulation in this
little society as a small honorary distinction, given annually, as a
prize of successful application. The prize this year was peculiarly dear
to each individual, as it was the picture of a friend whom they dearly
loved. It was the picture of Mrs. Villars in a small bracelet. It
wanted neither gold, pearls nor precious stones to give it value. The two foremost candidates for this prize were Cecilia and Leonora. Cecilia was the most intimate friend of Leonora; but Leonora was only the
favourite companion of Cecilia. Cecilia was of an active, ambitious, enterprising disposition, more eager
in the pursuit than happy in the enjoyment of her wishes. Leonora was of
a contented, unaspiring temperate character; not easily roused to action,
but indefatigable when once excited. Leonora was proud; Cecilia was
vain.