Do you
know," said he, laying hold of Archer's button, "I'm in the secret. There are nine of us have crooked our little fingers upon it, not to stir
a step till we get her advice; and she has appointed me to meet her about
particular business of my own at eight. So I'm to consult her and to
bring her answer." Archer knew too well how to govern fools, to attempt to reason with them;
and, instead of laughing any longer at Fisher's ridiculous superstition,
he was determined to take advantage of it. He affected to be persuaded
of the wisdom of the measure; looked at his watch; urged him to be exact
to a moment; conjured him to remember exactly the words of the oracle;
and, above all things, to demand the lucky hour and minute when the
Barring Out should begin. With these instructions Archer put his watch
into the solemn dupe's hand, and left him to count the seconds, till the
moment of his appointment, whilst he ran off himself to prepare the
oracle. At a little gate which looked into a lane, through which he guessed that
the gipsy must pass, he stationed himself, saw her, gave her half a crown
and her instructions, made his escape, and got back unsuspected to
Fisher, whom he found in the attitude in which he had left him, watching
the motion of the minute hand. Proud of his secret commission, Fisher slouched his hat, he knew not why,
over his face, and proceeded towards the appointed spot. To keep, as he
had been charged by Archer, within the letter of the law, he stood BEHIND
the forbidden building, and waited some minutes. Through a gap in the hedge the old woman at length made her appearance,
muffled up, and looking cautiously about her. "There's nobody near us!" said Fisher, and he began to be a little afraid. "What answer," said he,
recollecting himself, "about my Livy?" "Lost! lost! lost!" said the gipsy, lifting up her hands; "never, never,
never to be found! But no matter for that now; that is not your errand
to-night; no tricks with me; speak to me of what is next your heart." Fisher, astonished, put his hand upon his heart, told her all that she
knew before, and received the answers that Archer had dictated:  "That
the Archers should be lucky as long as they stuck to their manager, and
to one another; that the Barring Out should end in woe, if not begun
precisely as the clock should strike nine on Wednesday night; but if
begun in that LUCKY moment, and all obedient to their LUCKY leader, all
should end well." A thought, a provident thought, now struck Fisher; for even he had some
foresight where his favourite passion was concerned. "Pray, in our
Barring Out shall we be starved?" "No," said the gipsy, "not if you trust to me for food, and if you give
me money enough. Silver won't do for so many; gold is what must cross my
hand." "I have no gold," said Fisher, "and I don't know what you mean by 'so
many.' I'm only talking of number one, you know. I must take care of
that first." So, as Fisher thought it was possible that Archer, clever as he was,
might be disappointed in his supplies, he determined to take secret
measures for himself. His Aunt Barbara's interdiction had shut him out
of the confectioner's shop; but he flattered himself that he could outwit
his aunt; he therefore begged the gipsy to procure him twelve buns by
Thursday morning, and bring them secretly to one of the windows of the
schoolroom. As Fisher did not produce any money when he made this proposal, it was at
first absolutely rejected; but a bribe at length conquered his
difficulties; and the bribe which Fisher found himself obliged to give--
for he had no pocket money left of his own, he being as much RESTRICTED
in that article as Archer was INDULGED--the bribe that he found himself
obliged to give to quiet the gipsy was half a crown, which Archer had
intrusted to him to buy candles for the theatre. "Oh," thought he to
himself; "Archer's so careless about money, he will never think of asking
me for the half-crown again; and now he'll want no candles for the
THEATRE; or, at anyrate, it will be some time first; and maybe, Aunt
Barbara may be got to give me that much at Christmas; then, if the worst
comes to the worst, one can pay Archer. My mouth waters for the buns,
and have 'em I must now." So, for the hope of twelve buns, he sacrificed the money which had been
intrusted to him. Thus the meanest motives, in mean minds often prompt
to the commission of those great faults, to which one should think
nothing but some violent passion could have tempted. The ambassador having thus, in his opinion, concluded his own and the
public business, returned well satisfied with the result, after receiving
the gipsy's reiterated promise to tap THREE TIMES at the window on
Thursday morning. The day appointed for the Barring Out at length arrived; and Archer,
assembling the confederates, informed them, that all was prepared for
carrying their design into execution; that he now depended for success
upon their punctuality and courage. He had, within the last two hours,
got all their bars ready to fasten the doors and window shutters of the
schoolroom; he had, with the assistance of two of the day scholars who
were of the party, sent into the town for provisions, at his own expense,
which would make a handsome supper for that night; he had also negotiated
with some cousins of his, who lived in the town, for a constant supply in
future. "Bless me," exclaimed Archer, suddenly stopping in this
narration of his services, "there's one thing, after all, I've forgot, we
shall be undone without it. Fisher, pray did you ever buy the candles
for the playhouse?" "No, to be sure," replied Fisher, extremely frightened; "you know you
don't want candles for the playhouse now." "Not for the playhouse, but for the Barring Out. We shall be in the
dark, man. You must run this minute, run." "For candles?" said Fisher, confused; "how many?--what sort?" "Stupidity!" exclaimed Archer, "you are a pretty fellow at a dead lift! Lend me a pencil and a bit of paper, do; I'll write down what I want
myself! Well, what are you fumbling for?" "For money!" said Fisher, colouring. "Money, man! Didn't I give you half a crown the other day?" "Yes," replied Fisher, stammering; "but I wasn't sure that that might be
enough." "Enough! yes, to be sure it will. I don't know what you are AT." "Nothing, nothing," said Fisher, "here, write upon this, then," said
Fisher, putting a piece of paper into Archer's hand, upon which Archer
wrote his orders. "Away, away!" cried he. Away went Fisher. He returned; but not until a considerable time
afterwards. They were at supper when he returned. "Fisher always comes
in at supper-time," observed one of the Greybeards, carelessly. "Well, and would you have him come in AFTER supper-time?" said Townsend,
who always supplied his party with ready wit. "I've got the candles," whispered Fisher as he passed by Archer to his
place. "And the tinder-box?" said Archer. "Yes; I got back from my Aunt Barbara under pretence that I must study
for repetition day an hour later to-night. So I got leave. Was not that
clever?" A dunce always thinks it clever to cheat even by SOBER LIES. How Mr.
Fisher procured the candles and the tinder box without money, and without
credit, we shall discover further on. Archer and his associates had agreed to stay the last in the schoolroom;
and as soon as the Greybeards were gone out to bed, he, as the signal,
was to shut and lock one door, Townsend the other. A third conspirator
was to strike a light, in case they should not be able to secure a
candle. A fourth was to take charge of the candle as soon as lighted;
and all the rest were to run to their bars, which were secreted in a
room; then to fix them to the common fastening bars of the window, in the
manner in which they had been previously instructed by the manager. Thus
each had his part assigned, and each was warned that the success of the
whole depended upon their order and punctuality. Order and punctuality, it appears, are necessary even in a Barring Out;
and even rebellion must have its laws. The long expected moment at length arrived. De Grey and his friends,
unconscious of what was going forward, walked out of the schoolroom as
usual at bedtime. The clock began to strike nine. There was one
Greybeard left in the room, who was packing up some of his books, which
had been left about by accident. It is impossible to describe the
impatience with which he was watched, especially by Fisher, and the nine
who depended upon the gipsy oracle. When he had got all his books together under his arm, he let one of them
fall; and whilst he stooped to pick it up, Archer gave the signal. The
doors were shut, locked, and double-locked in an instant. A light was
struck and each ran to his post. The bars were all in the same moment
put up to the windows, and Archer, when he had tried them all, and seen
that they were secure, gave a loud "Huzza!" --in which he was joined by
all the party most manfully--by all but the poor Greybeard, who, the
picture of astonishment, stood stock still in the midst of them with his
books under his arm; at which spectacle Townsend, who enjoyed the FROLIC
of the fray more than anything else, burst into an immoderate fit of
laughter. "So, my little Greybeard," said he, holding a candle full in
his eyes, "what think you of all this?--How came you amongst the wicked
ones?" "I don't know, indeed," said the little boy, very gravely:  "you shut me
up amongst you. Won't you let me out?" "Let you out! No, no, my little Greybeard," said Archer, catching hold
of him, and dragging him to the window bars. "Look ye here--touch these-
-put your hand to them--pull, push, kick--put a little spirit into it,
man--kick like an Archer, if you can; away with ye. It's a pity that the
king of the Greybeards is not here to admire me. I should like to show
him our fortifications. But come, my merry men all, now to the feast. Out with the table into the middle of the room. Good cheer, my jolly
Archers! I'm your manager!"