Good morrow, Noble Sir

   Macb. Good morrow both

   Macd. Is the King stirring, worthy Thane? Macb. Not yet

   Macd. He did command me to call timely on him,
I haue almost slipt the houre

   Macb. Ile bring you to him

   Macd. I know this is a ioyfull trouble to you:
But yet 'tis one

   Macb. The labour we delight in, Physicks paine:
This is the Doore

   Macd. Ile make so bold to call, for 'tis my limitted
seruice. Exit Macduffe. Lenox. Goes the King hence to day? Macb. He does: he did appoint so

   Lenox. The Night ha's been vnruly:
Where we lay, our Chimneys were blowne downe,
And (as they say) lamentings heard i'th' Ayre;
Strange Schreemes of Death,
And Prophecying, with Accents terrible,
Of dyre Combustion, and confus'd Euents,
New hatch'd toth' wofull time. The obscure Bird clamor'd the liue-long Night. Some say, the Earth was Feuorous,
And did shake

   Macb. 'Twas a rough Night

   Lenox. My young remembrance cannot paralell
A fellow to it. Enter Macduff. Macd. O horror, horror, horror,
Tongue nor Heart cannot conceiue, nor name thee

   Macb. and Lenox. What's the matter? Macd. Confusion now hath made his Master-peece:
Most sacrilegious Murther hath broke ope
The Lords anoynted Temple, and stole thence
The Life o'th' Building

   Macb. What is't you say, the Life? Lenox. Meane you his Maiestie? Macd. Approch the Chamber, and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Doe not bid me speake:
See, and then speake your selues: awake, awake,

Exeunt. Macbeth and Lenox. Ring the Alarum Bell: Murther, and Treason,
Banquo, and Donalbaine: Malcolme awake,
Shake off this Downey sleepe, Deaths counterfeit,
And looke on Death it selfe: vp, vp, and see
The great Doomes Image: Malcolme, Banquo,
As from your Graues rise vp, and walke like Sprights,
To countenance this horror. Ring the Bell. Bell rings. Enter Lady. Lady. What's the Businesse? That such a hideous Trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the House? speake, speake

   Macd. O gentle Lady,
'Tis not for you to heare what I can speake:
The repetition in a Womans eare,
Would murther as it fell. Enter Banquo. O Banquo, Banquo, Our Royall Master's murther'd

   Lady. Woe, alas:
What, in our House? Ban. Too cruell, any where. Deare Duff, I prythee contradict thy selfe,
And say, it is not so. Enter Macbeth, Lenox, and Rosse. Macb. Had I but dy'd an houre before this chance,
I had liu'd a blessed time: for from this instant,
There's nothing serious in Mortalitie:
All is but Toyes: Renowne and Grace is dead,
The Wine of Life is drawne, and the meere Lees
Is left this Vault, to brag of. Enter Malcolme and Donalbaine. Donal. What is amisse? Macb. You are, and doe not know't:
The Spring, the Head, the Fountaine of your Blood
Is stopt, the very Source of it is stopt

   Macd. Your Royall Father's murther'd

   Mal. Oh, by whom? Lenox. Those of his Chamber, as it seem'd, had don't:
Their Hands and Faces were all badg'd with blood,
So were their Daggers, which vnwip'd, we found
Vpon their Pillowes: they star'd, and were distracted,
No mans Life was to be trusted with them

   Macb. O, yet I doe repent me of my furie,
That I did kill them

   Macd. Wherefore did you so? Macb. Who can be wise, amaz'd, temp'rate, & furious,
Loyall, and Neutrall, in a moment? No man:
Th' expedition of my violent Loue
Out-run the pawser, Reason. Here lay Duncan,
His Siluer skinne, lac'd with His Golden Blood,
And his gash'd Stabs, look'd like a Breach in Nature,
For Ruines wastfull entrance: there the Murtherers,
Steep'd in the Colours of their Trade; their Daggers
Vnmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refraine,
That had a heart to loue; and in that heart,
Courage, to make's loue knowne? Lady. Helpe me hence, hoa

   Macd. Looke to the Lady

   Mal. Why doe we hold our tongues,
That most may clayme this argument for ours? Donal. What should be spoken here,
Where our Fate hid in an augure hole,
May rush, and seize vs? Let's away,
Our Teares are not yet brew'd

   Mal. Nor our strong Sorrow
Vpon the foot of Motion

   Banq. Looke to the Lady:
And when we haue our naked Frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure; let vs meet,
And question this most bloody piece of worke,
To know it further. Feares and scruples shake vs:
In the great Hand of God I stand, and thence,
Against the vndivulg'd pretence, I fight
Of Treasonous Mallice

   Macd. And so doe I

   All. So all

   Macb. Let's briefely put on manly readinesse,
And meet i'th' Hall together

   All. Well contented. Exeunt. Malc. What will you doe? Let's not consort with them:
To shew an vnfelt Sorrow, is an Office
Which the false man do's easie. Ile to England

   Don. To Ireland, I:
Our seperated fortune shall keepe vs both the safer:
Where we are, there's Daggers in mens smiles;
The neere in blood, the neerer bloody

   Malc. This murtherous Shaft that's shot,
Hath not yet lighted: and our safest way,
Is to auoid the ayme. Therefore to Horse,
And let vs not be daintie of leaue-taking,
But shift away: there's warrant in that Theft,
Which steales it selfe, when there's no mercie left. Exeunt. Scena Quarta. Enter Rosse, with an Old man. Old man. Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the Volume of which Time, I haue seene
Houres dreadfull, and things strange: but this sore Night
Hath trifled former knowings

   Rosse. Ha, good Father,
Thou seest the Heauens, as troubled with mans Act,
Threatens his bloody Stage: byth' Clock 'tis Day,
And yet darke Night strangles the trauailing Lampe:
Is't Nights predominance, or the Dayes shame,
That Darknesse does the face of Earth intombe,
When liuing Light should kisse it? Old man. 'Tis vnnaturall,
Euen like the deed that's done: On Tuesday last,
A Faulcon towring in her pride of place,
Was by a Mowsing Owle hawkt at, and kill'd

   Rosse. And Duncans Horses,
(A thing most strange, and certaine)
Beauteous, and swift, the Minions of their Race,
Turn'd wilde in nature, broke their stalls, flong out,
Contending 'gainst Obedience, as they would
Make Warre with Mankinde

   Old man. 'Tis said, they eate each other

   Rosse. They did so:
To th' amazement of mine eyes that look'd vpon't.