The Elector
came on the appointed day, and with him came his favourite courtiers
from the castle. Then the statue was unveiled. It was very
beautiful,--so beautiful that the prince exclaimed in surprise. He could
not look enough, and presently he turned to the artist and shook hands
with him, like an old friend. "Herr Grupello," he said, "you are a great
artist, and this statue will make your fame even greater than it is; the
portrait of me is perfect!" When the courtiers heard this, and saw the friendly hand-shake, their
jealousy of the artist was beyond bounds. Their one thought was, how
could they safely do something to humiliate him. They dared not pick
flaws in the portrait statue, for the prince had declared it perfect. But at last one of them said, with an air of great frankness, "Indeed,
Herr Grupello, the portrait of his Royal Highness is perfect; but permit
me to say that the statue of the horse is not quite so successful: the
head is too large; it is out of proportion." "No," said another, "the horse is really not so successful; the turn of
the neck, there, is awkward." "If you would change the right hind-foot, Herr Grupello," said a third,
"it would be an improvement." Still another found fault with the horse's tail. The artist listened, quietly. When they had all finished, he turned to
the prince and said, "Your courtiers, prince, find a good many flaws in
the statue of the horse; will you permit me to keep it a few days more,
to do what I can with it?" The Elector assented, and the artist ordered a temporary screen to be
built around the statue, so that his assistants could work undisturbed. For several days the sound of hammering came steadily from behind the
enclosure. The courtiers, who took care to pass that way, often, were
delighted. Each one said to himself, "I must have been right, really;
the artist himself sees that something was wrong; now I shall have
credit for saving the prince's portrait by my artistic taste!" Once more the artist summoned the prince and his courtiers, and once
more the statue was unveiled. Again the Elector exclaimed at its beauty,
and then he turned to his courtiers, one after another, to see what they
had to say. "Perfect!" said the first. "Now that the horse's head is in proportion,
there is not a flaw." "The change in the neck was just what was needed," said the second; "it
is very graceful now." "The rear right foot is as it should be, now," said a third, "and it
adds so much to the beauty of the whole!" The fourth said that he considered the tail greatly improved. "My courtiers are much pleased now," said the prince to Herr Grupello;
"they think the statue much improved by the changes you have made." Herr Grupello smiled a little. "I am glad they are pleased," he said,
"but the fact is, I have changed nothing!" "What do you mean?" said the prince in surprise. "Have we not heard the
sound of hammering every day? What were you hammering at then?" "I was hammering at the reputation of your courtiers, who found fault
simply because they were jealous," said the artist. "And I rather think
that their reputation is pretty well hammered to pieces!" It was, indeed. The Elector laughed heartily, but the courtiers slunk
away, one after another, without a word. PRINCE CHERRY

There was once an old king, so wise and kind and true that the most
powerful good fairy of his land visited him and asked him to name the
dearest wish of his heart, that she might grant it. "Surely you know it," said the good king; "it is for my only son, Prince
Cherry; do for him whatever you would have done for me." "Gladly," said the great fairy; "choose what I shall give him. I can
make him the richest, the most beautiful, or the most powerful prince in
the world; choose." "None of those things are what I want," said the king. "I want only that
he shall be good. Of what use will it be to him to be beautiful, rich,
or powerful, if he grows into a bad man? Make him the best prince in the
world, I beg you!" "Alas, I cannot make him good," said the fairy; "he must do that for
himself. I can give him good advice, reprove him when he does wrong, and
punish him if he will not punish himself; I can and will be his best
friend, but I cannot make him good unless he wills it." The king was sad to hear this, but he rejoiced in the friendship of the
fairy for his son. And when he died, soon after, he was happy to know
that he left Prince Cherry in her hands. Prince Cherry grieved for his father, and often lay awake at night,
thinking of him. One night, when he was all alone in his room, a soft
and lovely light suddenly shone before him, and a beautiful vision stood
at his side. It was the good fairy. She was clad in robes of dazzling
white, and on her shining hair she wore a wreath of white roses. "I am the Fairy Candide," she said to the prince. "I promised your
father that I would be your best friend, and as long as you live I shall
watch over your happiness. I have brought you a gift; it is not
wonderful to look at, but it has a wonderful power for your welfare;
wear it, and let it help you." As she spoke, she placed a small gold ring on the prince's little
finger. "This ring," she said, "will help you to be good; when you do
evil, it will prick you, to remind you. If you do not heed its warnings
a worse thing will happen to you, for I shall become your enemy." Then
she vanished. Prince Cherry wore his ring, and said nothing to anyone of the fairy's
gift. It did not prick him for a long time, because he was good and
merry and happy. But Prince Cherry had been rather spoiled by his nurse
when he was a child; she had always said to him that when he should
become king he could do exactly as he pleased. Now, after a while, he
began to find out that this was not true, and it made him angry. The first time that he noticed that even a king could not always have
his own way was on a day when he went hunting. It happened that he got
no game. This put him in such a bad temper that he grumbled and scolded
all the way home. The little gold ring began to feel tight and
uncomfortable. When he reached the palace his pet dog ran to meet him. "Go away!" said the prince, crossly. But the little dog was so used to being petted that he only jumped up on
his master, and tried to kiss his hand. The prince turned and kicked the
little creature. At the instant, he felt a sharp prick in his little
finger, like a pin prick. "What nonsense!" said the prince to himself. "Am I not king of the whole
land? May I not kick my own dog, if I choose? What evil is there in
that?" A silver voice spoke in his ear: "The king of the land has a right to do
good, but not evil; you have been guilty of bad temper and of cruelty
to-day; see that you do better to-morrow." The prince turned sharply, but no one was to be seen; yet he recognised
the voice as that of Fairy Candide. He followed her advice for a little, but presently he forgot, and the
ring pricked him so sharply that his finger had a drop of blood on it. This happened again and again, for the prince grew more self-willed and
headstrong every day; he had some bad friends, too, who urged him on, in
the hope that he would ruin himself and give them a chance to seize the
throne. He treated his people carelessly and his servants cruelly, and
everything he wanted he felt that he must have. The ring annoyed him terribly; it was embarrassing for a king to have a
drop of blood on his finger all the time! At last he took the ring off
and put it out of sight. Then he thought he should be perfectly happy,
having his own way; but instead, he grew more unhappy as he grew less
good. Whenever he was crossed, or could not have his own way instantly,
he flew into a passion. Finally, he wanted something that he really could not have. This time it
was a most beautiful young girl, named Zelia; the prince saw her, and
loved her so much that he wanted at once to make her his queen. To his
great astonishment, she refused. "Am I not pleasing to you?" asked the prince in surprise. "You are very handsome, very charming, prince," said Zelia; "but you are
not like the good king, your father; I fear you would make me very
miserable if I were your queen." In a great rage, Prince Cherry ordered the young girl to be put in
prison; and the key of her dungeon he kept. He told one of his friends,
a wicked man who flattered him for his own purposes, about the thing,
and asked his advice. "Are you not king?" said the bad friend. "May you not do as you will? Keep the girl in a dungeon till she does as you command, and if she will
not, sell her as a slave."