Selah. His
glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise. 3:4 And his brightness was as the light; he had horns coming out of
his hand: and there was the hiding of his power. 3:5 Before him went the pestilence, and burning coals went forth at
his feet. 3:6 He stood, and measured the earth: he beheld, and drove asunder the
nations; and the everlasting mountains were scattered, the perpetual
hills did bow: his ways are everlasting. 3:7 I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction: and the curtains of the
land of Midian did tremble. 3:8 Was the LORD displeased against the rivers? was thine anger
against the rivers? was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst
ride upon thine horses and thy chariots of salvation? 3:9 Thy bow was
made quite naked, according to the oaths of the tribes, even thy word. Selah. Thou didst cleave the earth with rivers. 3:10 The mountains saw thee, and they trembled: the overflowing of the
water passed by: the deep uttered his voice, and lifted up his hands
on high. 3:11 The sun and moon stood still in their habitation: at the light of
thine arrows they went, and at the shining of thy glittering spear. 3:12 Thou didst march through the land in indignation, thou didst
thresh the heathen in anger. 3:13 Thou wentest forth for the salvation of thy people, even for
salvation with thine anointed; thou woundedst the head out of the
house of the wicked, by discovering the foundation unto the neck. Selah. 3:14 Thou didst strike through with his staves the head of his
villages: they came out as a whirlwind to scatter me: their rejoicing
was as to devour the poor secretly. 3:15 Thou didst walk through the sea with thine horses, through the
heap of great waters. 3:16 When I heard, my belly trembled; my lips quivered at the voice:
rottenness entered into my bones, and I trembled in myself, that I
might rest in the day of trouble: when he cometh up unto the people,
he will invade them with his troops. 3:17 Although the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be
in the vines; the labour of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall
yield no meat; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there
shall be no herd in the stalls: 3:18 Yet I will rejoice in the LORD, I
will joy in the God of my salvation. 3:19 The LORD God is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds'
feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places. To the chief
singer on my stringed instruments. Zephaniah


1:1 The word of the LORD which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi,
the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the
days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah. 1:2 I will utterly consume all things from off the land, saith the
LORD. 1:3 I will consume man and beast; I will consume the fowls of the
heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumbling blocks with the
wicked: and I will cut off man from off the land, saith the LORD. 1:4 I will also stretch out mine hand upon Judah, and upon all the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from
this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests; 1:5 And
them that worship the host of heaven upon the housetops; and them that
worship and that swear by the LORD, and that swear by Malcham; 1:6 And
them that are turned back from the LORD; and those that have not
sought the LORD, nor enquired for him. 1:7 Hold thy peace at the presence of the Lord GOD: for the day of the
LORD is at hand: for the LORD hath prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid
his guests. 1:8 And it shall come to pass in the day of the LORD's sacrifice, that
I will punish the princes, and the king's children, and all such as
are clothed with strange apparel. 1:9 In the same day also will I punish all those that leap on the
threshold, which fill their masters' houses with violence and deceit. 1:10 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the LORD, that there
shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and an howling from
the second, and a great crashing from the hills. 1:11 Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the merchant people are
cut down; all they that bear silver are cut off. 1:12 And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search
Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men that are settled on their
lees: that say in their heart, The LORD will not do good, neither will
he do evil. 1:13 Therefore their goods shall become a booty, and their houses a
desolation: they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them; and
they shall plant vineyards, but not drink the wine thereof. 1:14 The great day of the LORD is near, it is near, and hasteth
greatly, even the voice of the day of the LORD: the mighty man shall
cry there bitterly. 1:15 That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day
of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day
of clouds and thick darkness, 1:16 A day of the trumpet and alarm
against the fenced cities, and against the high towers. 1:17 And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like
blind men, because they have sinned against the LORD: and their blood
shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as the dung. 1:18 Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them
in the day of the LORD's wrath; but the whole land shall be devoured
by the fire of his jealousy: for he shall make even a speedy riddance
of all them that dwell in the land. 2:1 Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation not
desired; 2:2 Before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the
chaff, before the fierce anger of the LORD come upon you, before the
day of the LORD's anger come upon you. 2:3 Seek ye the LORD, all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness: it may be ye shall be hid
in the day of the LORD's anger. 2:4 For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation: they shall
drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and Ekron shall be rooted up. 2:5 Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea coast, the nation of the
Cherethites! the word of the LORD is against you; O Canaan, the land
of the Philistines, I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no
inhabitant. 2:6 And the sea coast shall be dwellings and cottages for shepherds,
and folds for flocks. 2:7 And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah; they
shall feed thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lie down in
the evening: for the LORD their God shall visit them, and turn away
their captivity. 2:8 I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the
children of Ammon, whereby they have reproached my people, and
magnified themselves against their border. 2:9 Therefore as I live, saith the LORD of hosts, the God of Israel,
Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorrah,
even the breeding of nettles, and saltpits, and a perpetual
desolation: the residue of my people shall spoil them, and the remnant
of my people shall possess them. 2:10 This shall they have for their pride, because they have
reproached and magnified themselves against the people of the LORD of
hosts. 2:11 The LORD will be terrible unto them: for he will famish all the
gods of the earth; and men shall worship him, every one from his
place, even all the isles of the heathen. 2:12 Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword. 2:13 And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy
Assyria; and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like a
wilderness. 2:14 And flocks shall lie down in the midst of her, all the beasts of
the nations: both the cormorant and the bittern shall lodge in the
upper lintels of it; their voice shall sing in the windows; desolation
shall be in the thresholds; for he shall uncover the cedar work. 2:15 This is the rejoicing city that dwelt carelessly, that said in
her heart, I am, and there is none beside me: how is she become a
desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! every one that passeth
by her shall hiss, and wag his hand. 3:1 Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the oppressing city! 3:2 She obeyed not the voice; she received not correction; she trusted
not in the LORD; she drew not near to her God. 3:3 Her princes within her are roaring lions; her judges are evening
wolves; they gnaw not the bones till the morrow. 3:4 Her prophets are light and treacherous persons: her priests have
polluted the sanctuary, they have done violence to the law. 3:5 The just LORD is in the midst thereof; he will not do iniquity:
every morning doth he bring his judgment to light, he faileth not; but
the unjust knoweth no shame. 3:6 I have cut off the nations: their towers are desolate; I made
their streets waste, that none passeth by: their cities are destroyed,
so that there is no man, that there is none inhabitant. 3:7 I said, Surely thou wilt fear me, thou wilt receive instruction;
so their dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them:
but they rose early, and corrupted all their doings. 3:8 Therefore wait ye upon me, saith the LORD, until the day that I
rise up to the prey: for my determination is to gather the nations,
that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation,
even all my fierce anger: for all the earth shall be devoured with the
fire of my jealousy. 3:9 For then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may
all call upon the name of the LORD, to serve him with one consent. 3:10 From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia my suppliants, even the
daughter of my dispersed, shall bring mine offering. 3:11 In that day shalt thou not be ashamed for all thy doings, wherein
thou hast transgressed against me: for then I will take away out of
the midst of thee them that rejoice in thy pride, and thou shalt no
more be haughty because of my holy mountain. 3:12 I will also leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor
people, and they shall trust in the name of the LORD. 3:13 The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies;
neither shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth: for they
shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid. 3:14 Sing, O daughter of Zion; shout, O Israel; be glad and rejoice
with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem. 3:15 The LORD hath taken away thy judgments, he hath cast out thine
enemy: the king of Israel, even the LORD, is in the midst of thee:
thou shalt not see evil any more. 3:16 In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not: and to
Zion, Let not thine hands be slack. 3:17 The LORD thy God in the midst of thee is mighty; he will save, he
will rejoice over thee with joy; he will rest in his love, he will joy
over thee with singing. 3:18 I will gather them that are sorrowful for the solemn assembly,
who are of thee, to whom the reproach of it was a burden. 3:19 Behold, at that time I will undo all that afflict thee: and I
will save her that halteth, and gather her that was driven out; and I
will get them praise and fame in every land where they have been put
to shame. 3:20 At that time will I bring you again, even in the time that I
gather you: for I will make you a name and a praise among all people
of the earth, when I turn back your captivity before your eyes,
saith the LORD. Haggai


1:1 In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the
first day of the month, came the word of the LORD by Haggai the
prophet unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and
to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, saying, 1:2 Thus
speaketh the LORD of hosts, saying, This people say, The time is not
come, the time that the LORD's house should be built. 1:3 Then came the word of the LORD by Haggai the prophet, saying, 1:4
Is it time for you, O ye, to dwell in your cieled houses, and this
house lie waste? 1:5 Now therefore thus saith the LORD of hosts;
Consider your ways. 1:6 Ye have sown much, and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not
enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink; ye clothe you, but
there is none warm; and he that earneth wages earneth wages to put it
into a bag with holes. 1:7 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Consider your ways. 1:8 Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house; and I
will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, saith the LORD. 1:9 Ye looked for much, and, lo it came to little; and when ye brought
it home, I did blow upon it. Why? saith the LORD of hosts. Because of
mine house that is waste, and ye run every man unto his own house. 1:10 Therefore the heaven over you is stayed from dew, and the earth
is stayed from her fruit. 1:11 And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains,
and upon the corn, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon
that which the ground bringeth forth, and upon men, and upon cattle,
and upon all the labour of the hands. 1:12 Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of
Josedech, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed
the voice of the LORD their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet,
as the LORD their God had sent him, and the people did fear before the
LORD. 1:13 Then spake Haggai the LORD's messenger in the LORD's message unto
the people, saying, I am with you, saith the LORD. 1:14 And the LORD stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of
Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the
people; and they came and did work in the house of the LORD of hosts,
their God, 1:15 In the four and twentieth day of the sixth month, in
the second year of Darius the king. 2:1 In the seventh month, in the one and twentieth day of the month,
came the word of the LORD by the prophet Haggai, saying, 2:2 Speak now
to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua
the son of Josedech, the high priest, and to the residue of the
people, saying, 2:3 Who is left among you that saw this house in her
first glory? and how do ye see it now? is it not in your eyes in
comparison of it as nothing? 2:4 Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel,
saith the LORD; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high
priest; and be strong, all ye people of the land, saith the LORD, and
work: for I am with you, saith the LORD of hosts: 2:5 According to the
word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my
spirit remaineth among you: fear ye not. 2:6 For thus saith the LORD of hosts; Yet once, it is a little while,
and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry
land; 2:7 And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations
shall come: and I will fill this house with glory, saith the LORD of
hosts. 2:8 The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, saith the LORD of hosts. 2:9 The glory of this latter house shall be greater than of the
former, saith the LORD of hosts: and in this place will I give peace,
saith the LORD of hosts. 2:10 In the four and twentieth day of the ninth month, in the second
year of Darius, came the word of the LORD by Haggai the prophet,
saying, 2:11 Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Ask now the priests
concerning the law, saying, 2:12 If one bear holy flesh in the skirt
of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or
wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the priests answered
and said, No. 2:13 Then said Haggai, If one that is unclean by a dead body touch any
of these, shall it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It
shall be unclean.