Long strips and swirls of tattered and tawny cloud were dragged
downward to the west exactly as torn red raiment would be
dragged. And so strong and pitiless was the wind that it whipped
away fragments of red-flowering bushes or of copper beech, and
drove them also across the garden, a drift of red leaves, like
the leaves of autumn, as in parody of the red and driven rags of
cloud. There was a sense in earth and heaven as of everything breaking
up, and all the revolutionist in Turnbull rejoiced that it was
breaking up. The trees were breaking up under the wind, even in
the tall strength of their bloom: the clouds were breaking up and
losing even their large heraldic shapes. Shards and shreds of
copper cloud split off continually and floated by themselves, and
for some reason the truculent eye of Turnbull was attracted to
one of these careering cloudlets, which seemed to him to career
in an exaggerated manner. Also it kept its shape, which is
unusual with clouds shaken off; also its shape was of an odd
sort. Turnbull continued to stare at it, and in a little time occurred
that crucial instant when a thing, however incredible, is
accepted as a fact. The copper cloud was tumbling down towards
the earth, like some gigantic leaf from the copper beeches. And
as it came nearer it was evident, first, that it was not a cloud,
and, second, that it was not itself of the colour of copper;
only, being burnished like a mirror, it had reflected the
red-brown colours of the burning clouds. As the thing whirled
like a windswept leaf down towards the wall of the garden it was
clear that it was some sort of air-ship made of metal, and
slapping the air with big broad fins of steel. When it came about
a hundred feet above the garden, a shaggy, lean figure leapt up
in it, almost black against the bronze and scarlet of the west,
and, flinging out a kind of hook or anchor, caught on to the
green apple-tree just under the wall; and from that fixed holding
ground the ship swung in the red tempest like a captive balloon. While our friend stood frozen for an instant by his astonishment,
the queer figure in the airy car tipped the vehicle almost upside
down by leaping over the side of it, seemed to slide or drop down
the rope like a monkey, and alighted (with impossible precision
and placidity) seated on the edge of the wall, over which he
kicked and dangled his legs as he grinned at Turnbull. The wind
roared in the trees yet more ruinous and desolate, the red tails
of the sunset were dragged downward like red dragons sucked down
to death, and still on the top of the asylum wall sat the
sinister figure with the grimace, swinging his feet in tune with
the tempest; while above him, at the end of its tossing or
tightened cord, the enormous iron air-ship floated as light and
as little noticed as a baby's balloon upon its string. Turnbull's first movement after sixty motionless seconds was to
turn round and look at the large, luxuriant parallelogram of the
garden and the long, low rectangular building beyond. There was
not a soul or a stir of life within sight. And he had a quite
meaningless sensation, as if there never really had been any one
else there except he since the foundation of the world. Stiffening in himself the masculine but mirthless courage of the
atheist, he drew a little nearer to the wall and, catching the
man at a slightly different angle of the evening light, could see
his face and figure quite plain. Two facts about him stood out in
the picked colours of some piratical schoolboy's story. The first
was that his lean brown body was bare to the belt of his loose
white trousers; the other that through hygiene, affectation, or
whatever other cause, he had a scarlet handkerchief tied tightly
but somewhat aslant across his brow. After these two facts had
become emphatic, others appeared sufficiently important. One was
that under the scarlet rag the hair was plentiful, but white as
with the last snows of mortality. Another was that under the mop
of white and senile hair the face was strong, handsome, and
smiling, with a well-cut profile and a long cloven chin. The
length of this lower part of the face and the strange cleft in it
(which gave the man, in quite another sense from the common one,
a double chin) faintly spoilt the claim of the face to absolute
regularity, but it greatly assisted it in wearing the expression
of half-smiling and half-sneering arrogance with which it was
staring at all the stones, all the flowers, but especially at the
solitary man. "What do you want?" shouted Turnbull. "I want you, Jimmy," said the eccentric man on the wall, and with
the very word he had let himself down with a leap on to the
centre of the lawn, where he bounded once literally like an
India-rubber ball and then stood grinning with his legs astride. The only three facts that Turnbull could now add to his inventory
were that the man had an ugly-looking knife swinging at his
trousers belt, that his brown feet were as bare as his bronzed
trunk and arms, and that his eyes had a singular bleak brilliancy
which was of no particular colour. "Excuse my not being in evening dress," said the newcomer with an
urbane smile. "We scientific men, you know--I have to work my own
engines--electrical engineer--very hot work." "Look here," said Turnbull, sturdily clenching his fists in his
trousers pockets, "I am bound to expect lunatics inside these
four walls; but I do bar their coming from outside, bang out of
the sunset clouds." "And yet you came from the outside, too, Jim," said the stranger
in a voice almost affectionate. "What do you want?" asked Turnbull, with an explosion of temper
as sudden as a pistol shot. "I have already told you," said the man, lowering his voice and
speaking with evident sincerity; "I want you." "What do you want with me?" "I want exactly what you want," said the new-comer with a new
gravity. "I want the Revolution." Turnbull looked at the fire-swept sky and the wind-stricken
woodlands, and kept on repeating the word voicelessly to
himself--the word that did indeed so thoroughly express his mood
of rage as it had been among those red clouds and rocking
tree-tops. "Revolution!" he said to himself. "The
Revolution--yes, that is what I want right enough--anything, so
long as it is a Revolution." To some cause he could never explain he found himself completing
the sentence on the top of the wall, having automatically
followed the stranger so far. But when the stranger silently
indicated the rope that led to the machine, he found himself
pausing and saying: "I can't leave MacIan behind in this den." "We are going to destroy the Pope and all the kings," said the
new-comer. "Would it be wiser to take him with us?" Somehow the muttering Turnbull found himself in the flying ship
also, and it swung up into the sunset. "All the great rebels have been very little rebels," said the man
with the red scarf. "They have been like fourth-form boys who
sometimes venture to hit a fifth-form boy. That was all the worth
of their French Revolution and regicide. The boys never really
dared to defy the schoolmaster." "Whom do you mean by the schoolmaster?" asked Turnbull. "You know whom I mean," answered the strange man, as he lay back
on cushions and looked up into the angry sky. They seemed rising into stronger and stronger sunlight, as if it
were sunrise rather than sunset. But when they looked down at the
earth they saw it growing darker and darker. The lunatic asylum
in its large rectangular grounds spread below them in a
foreshortened and infantile plan, and looked for the first time
the grotesque thing that it was. But the clear colours of the
plan were growing darker every moment. The masses of rose or
rhododendron deepened from crimson to violet. The maze of gravel
pathways faded from gold to brown. By the time they had risen a
few hundred feet higher nothing could be seen of that darkening
landscape except the lines of lighted windows, each one of which,
at least, was the light of one lost intelligence. But on them as
they swept upward better and braver winds seemed to blow, and on
them the ruby light of evening seemed struck, and splashed like
red spurts from the grapes of Dionysus. Below them the fallen
lights were literally the fallen stars of servitude. And above
them all the red and raging clouds were like the leaping flags of
liberty. The man with the cloven chin seemed to have a singular power of
understanding thoughts; for, as Turnbull felt the whole universe
tilt and turn over his head, the stranger said exactly the right
thing. "Doesn't it seem as if everything were being upset?" said he;
"and if once everything is upset, He will be upset on top of it." Then, as Turnbull made no answer, his host continued:

"That is the really fine thing about space. It is topsy-turvy. You have only to climb far enough towards the morning star to
feel that you are coming down to it. You have only to dive deep
enough into the abyss to feel that you are rising. That is the
only glory of this universe--it is a giddy universe." Then, as Turnbull was still silent, he added:

"The heavens are full of revolution--of the real sort of
revolution. All the high things are sinking low and all the big
things looking small. All the people who think they are aspiring
find they are falling head foremost. And all the people who think
they are condescending find they are climbing up a precipice. That is the intoxication of space. That is the only joy of
eternity--doubt. There is only one pleasure the angels can
possibly have in flying, and that is, that they do not know
whether they are on their head or their heels." Then, finding his companion still mute, he fell himself into a
smiling and motionless meditation, at the end of which he said
suddenly:

"So MacIan converted you?" Turnbull sprang up as if spurning the steel car from under his
feet. "Converted me!" he cried. "What the devil do you mean? I
have known him for a month, and I have not retracted a
single----"

"This Catholicism is a curious thing," said the man of the cloven
chin in uninterrupted reflectiveness, leaning his elegant elbows
over the edge of the vessel; "it soaks and weakens men without
their knowing it, just as I fear it has soaked and weakened you." Turnbull stood in an attitude which might well have meant
pitching the other man out of the flying ship. "I am an atheist," he said, in a stifled voice. "I have always
been an atheist. I am still an atheist." Then, addressing the
other's indolent and indifferent back, he cried: "In God's name
what do you mean?" And the other answered without turning round:

"I mean nothing in God's name." Turnbull spat over the edge of the car and fell back furiously
into his seat. The other continued still unruffled, and staring over the edge
idly as an angler stares down at a stream. "The truth is that we never thought that you could have been
caught," he said; "we counted on you as the one red-hot
revolutionary left in the world. But, of course, these men like
MacIan are awfully clever, especially when they pretend to be
stupid." Turnbull leapt up again in a living fury and cried: "What have I
got to do with MacIan? I believe all I ever believed, and
disbelieve all I ever disbelieved. What does all this mean, and
what do you want with me here?" Then for the first time the other lifted himself from the edge of
the car and faced him. "I have brought you here," he answered, "to take part in the last
war of the world." "The last war!"