But that is just what the hair on Farmer Brown's boy's head did the day
he went fishing in the Laughing Brook and had no luck at all. There are
just two things that make hair rise--anger and fear. Anger sometimes
makes the hair on the back and neck of Bowser the Hound and of some
other little people bristle and stand up, and you know the hair on the
tail of Black Pussy stands on end until her tail looks twice as big as
it really is. Both anger and fear make it do that. But there is only one
thing that can make the hair on the head of Farmer Brown's boy rise, and
as it isn't anger, of course it must be fear. It never had happened before. You see, there isn't much of anything that
Farmer Brown's boy is really afraid of. Perhaps he wouldn't have been
afraid this time if it hadn't been for the surprise of what he found. You see when he had found the heads of those trout on the bank he knew
right away that some one else had been fishing, and that was why he
couldn't catch any; but it didn't seem possible that little Billy Mink
could have eaten all those trout, and Farmer Brown's boy didn't once
think of Little Joe Otter, and so he was very, very much puzzled. He was turning it all over in his mind and studying what it could mean,
when he came to a little muddy place on the bank of the Laughing Brook,
and there he saw something that made his eyes look as if they would pop
right out of his head, and it was right then that he felt his hair rise. Anyway, that is what he said when he told about it afterward. What was
it he saw? What do you think? Why, it was a footprint in the soft mud. Yes, Sir, that's what it was, and all it was. But it was the biggest
footprint Farmer Brown's boy ever had seen, and it looked as if it had
been made only a few minutes before. It was the footprint of Buster
Bear. Now Farmer Brown's boy didn't know that Buster Bear had come down to the
Green Forest to live. He never had heard of a Bear being in the Green
Forest. And so he was so surprised that he had hard work to believe his
own eyes, and he had a queer feeling all over,--a little chilly feeling,
although it was a warm day. Somehow, he didn't feel like meeting Buster
Bear. If he had had his terrible gun with him, it might have been
different. But he didn't, and so he suddenly made up his mind that he
didn't want to fish any more that day. He had a funny feeling, too, that
he was being watched, although he couldn't see any one. He _was_ being
watched. Little Joe Otter and Buster Bear were watching him and taking
the greatest care to keep out of his sight. All the way home through the Green Forest, Farmer Brown's boy kept
looking behind him, and he didn't draw a long breath until he reached
the edge of the Green Forest. He hadn't run, but he had wanted to. "Huh!" said Buster Bear to Little Joe Otter, "I believe he was afraid!" And Buster Bear was just exactly right. IX

LITTLE JOE OTTER HAS GREAT NEWS TO TELL


Little Joe Otter was fairly bursting with excitement. He could hardly
contain himself. He felt that he had the greatest news to tell since
Peter Rabbit had first found the tracks of Buster Bear in the Green
Forest. He couldn't keep it to himself a minute longer than he had to. So he hurried to the Smiling Pool, where he was sure he would find Billy
Mink and Jerry Muskrat and Grandfather Frog and Spotty the Turtle, and
he hoped that perhaps some of the little people who live in the Green
Forest might be there too. Sure enough, Peter Rabbit was there on one
side of the Smiling Pool, making faces at Reddy Fox, who was on the
other side, which, of course, was not at all nice of Peter. Mr. and Mrs.
Redwing were there, and Blacky the Crow was sitting in the Big
Hickory-tree. Little Joe Otter swam straight to the Big Rock and climbed up to the
very highest part. He looked so excited, and his eyes sparkled so, that
every one knew right away that something had happened. "Hi!" cried Billy Mink. "Look at Little Joe Otter! It must be that for
once he has been smarter than Buster Bear." Little Joe made a good-natured face at Billy Mink and shook his head. "No, Billy," said he, "you are wrong, altogether wrong. I don't believe
anybody can be smarter than Buster Bear." [Illustration: Reddy glared across the Smiling Pool at Peter. _Page 45._]

Reddy Fox rolled his lips back in an unpleasant grin. "Don't be too
sure of that!" he snapped. "I'm not through with him yet." "Boaster! Boaster!" cried Peter Rabbit. Reddy glared across the Smiling Pool at Peter. "I'm not through with you
either, Peter Rabbit!" he snarled. "You'll find it out one of these fine
days!" "Reddy, Reddy, smart and sly,
  Couldn't catch a buzzing fly!" taunted Peter. "Chug-a-rum!" said Grandfather Frog in his deepest, gruffest voice. "We
know all about that. What we want to know is what Little Joe Otter has
got on his mind." "It's news--great news!" cried Little Joe. "We can tell better how great it is when we hear what it is," replied
Grandfather Frog testily. "What is it?" Little Joe Otter looked around at all the eager faces watching him, and
then in the slowest, most provoking way, he drawled: "Farmer Brown's boy
is afraid of Buster Bear." For a minute no one said a word. Then Blacky the Crow leaned down from
his perch in the Big Hickory-tree and looked very hard at Little Joe as
he said:

"I don't believe it. I don't believe a word of it. Farmer Brown's boy
isn't afraid of any one who lives in the Green Forest or on the Green
Meadows or in the Smiling Pool, and you know it. We are all afraid of
him." Little Joe glared back at Blacky. "I don't care whether you believe it
or not; it's true," he retorted. Then he told how early that very
morning he and Buster Bear had been fishing together in the Laughing
Brook, and how Farmer Brown's boy had been fishing there too, and hadn't
caught a single trout because they had all been caught or frightened
before he got there. Then he told how Farmer Brown's boy had found a
footprint of Buster Bear in the soft mud, and how he had stopped fishing
right away and started for home, looking behind him with fear in his
eyes all the way. "Now tell me that he isn't afraid!" concluded Little Joe. "For once he
knows just how we feel when he comes prowling around where we are. Isn't
that great news? Now we'll get even with _him_!" "I'll believe it when I see it for myself!" snapped Blacky the Crow. X

BUSTER BEAR BECOMES A HERO


The news that Little Joe Otter told at the Smiling Pool,--how Farmer
Brown's boy had run away from Buster Bear without even seeing him,--soon
spread all over the Green Meadows and through the Green Forest, until
every one who lives there knew about it. Of course, Peter Rabbit helped
spread it. Trust Peter for that! But everybody else helped too. You see,
they had all been afraid of Farmer Brown's boy for so long that they
were tickled almost to pieces at the very thought of having some one in
the Green Forest who could make Farmer Brown's boy feel fear as they
had felt it. And so it was that Buster Bear became a hero right away to
most of them. A few doubted Little Joe's story. One of them was Blacky the Crow. Another was Reddy Fox. Blacky doubted because he knew Farmer Brown's boy
so well that he couldn't imagine him afraid. Reddy doubted because he
didn't want to believe. You see, he was jealous of Buster Bear, and at
the same time he was afraid of him. So Reddy pretended not to believe a
word of what Little Joe Otter had said, and he agreed with Blacky that
only by seeing Farmer Brown's boy afraid could he ever be made to
believe it. But nearly everybody else believed it, and there was great
rejoicing.