Affection, puh. You speake like a greene Girle,
Vnsifted in such perillous Circumstance. Doe you beleeue his tenders, as you call them? Ophe. I do not know, my Lord, what I should thinke

   Polon. Marry Ile teach you; thinke your selfe a Baby,
That you haue tane his tenders for true pay,
Which are not starling. Tender your selfe more dearly;
Or not to crack the winde of the poore Phrase,
Roaming it thus, you'l tender me a foole

   Ophe. My Lord, he hath importun'd me with loue,
In honourable fashion

   Polon. I, fashion you may call it, go too, go too

   Ophe. And hath giuen countenance to his speech,
My Lord, with all the vowes of Heauen

   Polon. I, Springes to catch Woodcocks. I doe know
When the Bloud burnes, how Prodigall the Soule
Giues the tongue vowes: these blazes, Daughter,
Giuing more light then heate; extinct in both,
Euen in their promise, as it is a making;
You must not take for fire. For this time Daughter,
Be somewhat scanter of your Maiden presence;
Set your entreatments at a higher rate,
Then a command to parley. For Lord Hamlet,
Beleeue so much in him, that he is young,
And with a larger tether may he walke,
Then may be giuen you. In few, Ophelia,
Doe not beleeue his vowes; for they are Broakers,
Not of the eye, which their Inuestments show:
But meere implorators of vnholy Sutes,
Breathing like sanctified and pious bonds,
The better to beguile. This is for all:
I would not, in plaine tearmes, from this time forth,
Haue you so slander any moment leisure,
As to giue words or talke with the Lord Hamlet:
Looke too't, I charge you; come your wayes

   Ophe. I shall obey my Lord. Exeunt. Enter Hamlet, Horatio, Marcellus. Ham. The Ayre bites shrewdly: is it very cold? Hor. It is a nipping and an eager ayre

   Ham. What hower now? Hor. I thinke it lacks of twelue

   Mar. No, it is strooke

   Hor. Indeed I heard it not: then it drawes neere the season,
Wherein the Spirit held his wont to walke. What does this meane my Lord? Ham. The King doth wake to night, and takes his rouse,
Keepes wassels and the swaggering vpspring reeles,
And as he dreines his draughts of Renish downe,
The kettle Drum and Trumpet thus bray out
The triumph of his Pledge

   Horat. Is it a custome? Ham. I marry ist;
And to my mind, though I am natiue heere,
And to the manner borne: It is a Custome
More honour'd in the breach, then the obseruance. Enter Ghost. Hor. Looke my Lord, it comes

   Ham. Angels and Ministers of Grace defend vs:
Be thou a Spirit of health, or Goblin damn'd,
Bring with thee ayres from Heauen, or blasts from Hell,
Be thy euents wicked or charitable,
Thou com'st in such a questionable shape
That I will speake to thee. Ile call thee Hamlet,
King, Father, Royall Dane: Oh, oh, answer me,
Let me not burst in Ignorance; but tell
Why thy Canoniz'd bones Hearsed in death,
Haue burst their cerments, why the Sepulcher
Wherein we saw thee quietly enurn'd,
Hath op'd his ponderous and Marble iawes,
To cast thee vp againe? What may this meane? That thou dead Coarse againe in compleat steele,
Reuisits thus the glimpses of the Moone,
Making Night hidious? And we fooles of Nature,
So horridly to shake our disposition,
With thoughts beyond thee; reaches of our Soules,
Say, why is this? wherefore? what should we doe? Ghost beckens Hamlet. Hor. It beckons you to goe away with it,
As if it some impartment did desire
To you alone

   Mar. Looke with what courteous action
It wafts you to a more remoued ground:
But doe not goe with it

   Hor. No, by no meanes

   Ham. It will not speake: then will I follow it

   Hor. Doe not my Lord

   Ham. Why, what should be the feare? I doe not set my life at a pins fee;
And for my Soule, what can it doe to that? Being a thing immortall as it selfe:
It waues me forth againe; Ile follow it

   Hor. What if it tempt you toward the Floud my Lord? Or to the dreadfull Sonnet of the Cliffe,
That beetles o're his base into the Sea,
And there assumes some other horrible forme,
Which might depriue your Soueraignty of Reason,
And draw you into madnesse thinke of it? Ham. It wafts me still: goe on, Ile follow thee

   Mar. You shall not goe my Lord

   Ham. Hold off your hand

   Hor. Be rul'd, you shall not goe

   Ham. My fate cries out,
And makes each petty Artire in this body,
As hardy as the Nemian Lions nerue:
Still am I cal'd? Vnhand me Gentlemen:
By Heau'n, Ile make a Ghost of him that lets me:
I say away, goe on, Ile follow thee. Exeunt. Ghost & Hamlet. Hor. He waxes desperate with imagination

   Mar. Let's follow; 'tis not fit thus to obey him

   Hor. Haue after, to what issue will this come? Mar. Something is rotten in the State of Denmarke

   Hor. Heauen will direct it

   Mar. Nay, let's follow him. Exeunt. Enter Ghost and Hamlet. Ham. Where wilt thou lead me? speak; Ile go no further

   Gho. Marke me

   Ham. I will

   Gho. My hower is almost come,
When I to sulphurous and tormenting Flames
Must render vp my selfe

   Ham. Alas poore Ghost

   Gho. Pitty me not, but lend thy serious hearing
To what I shall vnfold

   Ham. Speake, I am bound to heare

   Gho. So art thou to reuenge, when thou shalt heare

   Ham. What? Gho. I am thy Fathers Spirit,
Doom'd for a certaine terme to walke the night;
And for the day confin'd to fast in Fiers,
Till the foule crimes done in my dayes of Nature
Are burnt and purg'd away? But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my Prison-House;
I could a Tale vnfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow vp thy soule, freeze thy young blood,
Make thy two eyes like Starres, start from their Spheres,
Thy knotty and combined lockes to part,
And each particular haire to stand an end,
Like Quilles vpon the fretfull Porpentine:
But this eternall blason must not be
To eares of flesh and bloud; list Hamlet, oh list,
If thou didst euer thy deare Father loue

   Ham. Oh Heauen! Gho. Reuenge his foule and most vnnaturall Murther

   Ham. Murther? Ghost. Murther most foule, as in the best it is;
But this most foule, strange, and vnnaturall

   Ham. Hast, hast me to know it,
That with wings as swift
As meditation, or the thoughts of Loue,
May sweepe to my Reuenge

   Ghost. I finde thee apt,
And duller should'st thou be then the fat weede
That rots it selfe in ease, on Lethe Wharfe,
Would'st thou not stirre in this. Now Hamlet heare:
It's giuen out, that sleeping in mine Orchard,
A Serpent stung me: so the whole eare of Denmarke,
Is by a forged processe of my death
Rankly abus'd: But know thou Noble youth,
The Serpent that did sting thy Fathers life,
Now weares his Crowne

   Ham. O my Propheticke soule: mine Vncle? Ghost.