As they were looking round wildly for any trace of their wild
quarry, a keeper in uniform came running along the path with a
man in plain clothes. "Has it come this way?" gasped the keeper. "Has what?" asked Syme. "The elephant!" cried the keeper. "An elephant has gone mad and
run away!" "He has run away with an old gentleman," said the other stranger
breathlessly, "a poor old gentleman with white hair! " "What sort of old gentleman?" asked Syme, with great curiosity. "A very large and fat old gentleman in light grey clothes," said
the keeper eagerly. "Well," said Syme, "if he's that particular kind of old gentleman,
if you're quite sure that he's a large and fat old gentleman in
grey clothes, you may take my word for it that the elephant has
not run away with him. He has run away with the elephant. The
elephant is not made by God that could run away with him if he
did not consent to the elopement. And, by thunder, there he is!" There was no doubt about it this time. Clean across the space of
grass, about two hundred yards away, with a crowd screaming and
scampering vainly at his heels, went a huge grey elephant at an
awful stride, with his trunk thrown out as rigid as a ship's
bowsprit, and trumpeting like the trumpet of doom. On the back of
the bellowing and plunging animal sat President Sunday with all
the placidity of a sultan, but goading the animal to a furious
speed with some sharp object in his hand. "Stop him!" screamed the populace. "He'll be out of the gate!" "Stop a landslide!" said the keeper. "He is out of the gate!" And even as he spoke, a final crash and roar of terror announced
that the great grey elephant had broken out of the gates of the
Zoological Gardens, and was careening down Albany Street like a
new and swift sort of omnibus. "Great Lord!" cried Bull, "I never knew an elephant could go so
fast. Well, it must be hansom-cabs again if we are to keep him in
sight." As they raced along to the gate out of which the elephant had
vanished, Syme felt a glaring panorama of the strange animals in
the cages which they passed. Afterwards he thought it queer that
he should have seen them so clearly. He remembered especially
seeing pelicans, with their preposterous, pendant throats. He
wondered why the pelican was the symbol of charity, except it was
that it wanted a good deal of charity to admire a pelican. He
remembered a hornbill, which was simply a huge yellow beak with a
small bird tied on behind it. The whole gave him a sensation, the
vividness of which he could not explain, that Nature was always
making quite mysterious jokes. Sunday had told them that they
would understand him when they had understood the stars. He
wondered whether even the archangels understood the hornbill. The six unhappy detectives flung themselves into cabs and followed
the elephant sharing the terror which he spread through the long
stretch of the streets. This time Sunday did not turn round, but
offered them the solid stretch of his unconscious back, which
maddened them, if possible, more than his previous mockeries. Just
before they came to Baker Street, however, he was seen to throw
something far up into the air, as a boy does a ball meaning to
catch it again. But at their rate of racing it fell far behind,
just by the cab containing Gogol; and in faint hope of a clue or
for some impulse unexplainable, he stopped his cab so as to pick it
up. It was addressed to himself, and was quite a bulky parcel. On
examination, however, its bulk was found to consist of thirty-three
pieces of paper of no value wrapped one round the other. When the
last covering was torn away it reduced itself to a small slip of
paper, on which was written:--

"The word, I fancy, should be 'pink'." The man once known as Gogol said nothing, but the movements of his
hands and feet were like those of a man urging a horse to renewed
efforts. Through street after street, through district after district, went
the prodigy of the flying elephant, calling crowds to every window,
and driving the traffic left and right. And still through all this
insane publicity the three cabs toiled after it, until they came to
be regarded as part of a procession, and perhaps the advertisement
of a circus. They went at such a rate that distances were shortened
beyond belief, and Syme saw the Albert Hall in Kensington when he
thought that he was still in Paddington. The animal's pace was even
more fast and free through the empty, aristocratic streets of South
Kensington, and he finally headed towards that part of the sky-line
where the enormous Wheel of Earl's Court stood up in the sky. The
wheel grew larger and larger, till it filled heaven like the wheel
of stars. The beast outstripped the cabs. They lost him round several
corners, and when they came to one of the gates of the Earl's Court
Exhibition they found themselves finally blocked. In front of them
was an enormous crowd; in the midst of it was an enormous elephant,
heaving and shuddering as such shapeless creatures do. But the
President had disappeared. "Where has he gone to?" asked Syme, slipping to the ground. "Gentleman rushed into the Exhibition, sir!" said an official in a
dazed manner. Then he added in an injured voice: "Funny gentleman,
sir. Asked me to hold his horse, and gave me this." He held out with distaste a piece of folded paper, addressed: "To
the Secretary of the Central Anarchist Council." The Secretary, raging, rent it open, and found written inside it:--

"When the herring runs a mile,
Let the Secretary smile;
When the herring tries to fly,
Let the Secretary die. Rustic Proverb." "Why the eternal crikey," began the Secretary, "did you let the
man in? Do people commonly come to you Exhibition riding on mad
elephants? Do--"

"Look!" shouted Syme suddenly. "Look over there!" "Look at what?" asked the Secretary savagely. "Look at the captive balloon!" said Syme, and pointed in a frenzy. "Why the blazes should I look at a captive balloon?' demanded the
Secretary. "What is there queer about a captive balloon?" "Nothing," said Syme, "except that it isn't captive!' They all turned their eyes to where the balloon swung and swelled
above the Exhibition on a string, like a child's balloon. A second
afterwards the string came in two just under the car, and the
balloon, broken loose, floated away with the freedom of a soap
bubble. "Ten thousand devils!" shrieked the Secretary. "He's got into it!" and he shook his fists at the sky. The balloon, borne by some chance wind, came right above them, and
they could see the great white head of the President peering over
the side and looking benevolently down on them. "God bless my soul!" said the Professor with the elderly manner
that he could never disconnect from his bleached beard and
parchment face. "God bless my soul! I seemed to fancy that
something fell on the top of my hat!" He put up a trembling hand and took from that shelf a piece of
twisted paper, which he opened absently only to find it inscribed
with a true lover's knot and, the words:--

"Your beauty has not left me indifferent.--From LITTLE SNOWDROP. " There was a short silence, and then Syme said, biting his beard--

"I'm not beaten yet. The blasted thing must come down somewhere. Let's follow it!" CHAPTER XIV

THE SIX PHILOSOPHERS

ACROSS green fields, and breaking through blooming hedges, toiled
six draggled detectives, about five miles out of London. The
optimist of the party had at first proposed that they should
follow the balloon across South England in hansom-cabs. But he
was ultimately convinced of the persistent refusal of the balloon
to follow the roads, and the still more persistent refusal of the
cabmen to follow the balloon. Consequently the tireless though
exasperated travellers broke through black thickets and ploughed
through ploughed fields till each was turned into a figure too
outrageous to be mistaken for a tramp. Those green hills of
Surrey saw the final collapse and tragedy of the admirable light
grey suit in which Syme had set out from Saffron Park. His silk
hat was broken over his nose by a swinging bough, his coat-tails
were torn to the shoulder by arresting thorns, the clay of
England was splashed up to his collar; but he still carried his
yellow beard forward with a silent and furious determination, and
his eyes were still fixed on that floating ball of gas, which in
the full flush of sunset seemed coloured like a sunset cloud. "After all," he said, "it is very beautiful!" "It is singularly and strangely beautiful!" said the Professor.