40:24 After that he brought me toward the south, and behold a gate
toward the south: and he measured the posts thereof and the arches
thereof according to these measures. 40:25 And there were windows in it and in the arches thereof round
about, like those windows: the length was fifty cubits, and the
breadth five and twenty cubits. 40:26 And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches
thereof were before them: and it had palm trees, one on this side, and
another on that side, upon the posts thereof. 40:27 And there was a gate in the inner court toward the south: and he
measured from gate to gate toward the south an hundred cubits. 40:28 And he brought me to the inner court by the south gate: and he
measured the south gate according to these measures; 40:29 And the
little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the arches
thereof, according to these measures: and there were windows in it and
in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty cubits long, and five
and twenty cubits broad. 40:30 And the arches round about were five and twenty cubits long, and
five cubits broad. 40:31 And the arches thereof were toward the utter court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof: and the going up to it had eight
steps. 40:32 And he brought me into the inner court toward the east: and he
measured the gate according to these measures. 40:33 And the little chambers thereof, and the posts thereof, and the
arches thereof, were according to these measures: and there were
windows therein and in the arches thereof round about: it was fifty
cubits long, and five and twenty cubits broad. 40:34 And the arches thereof were toward the outward court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and
the going up to it had eight steps. 40:35 And he brought me to the north gate, and measured it according
to these measures; 40:36 The little chambers thereof, the posts
thereof, and the arches thereof, and the windows to it round about:
the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth five and twenty cubits. 40:37 And the posts thereof were toward the utter court; and palm
trees were upon the posts thereof, on this side, and on that side: and
the going up to it had eight steps. 40:38 And the chambers and the entries thereof were by the posts of
the gates, where they washed the burnt offering. 40:39 And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and
two tables on that side, to slay thereon the burnt offering and the
sin offering and the trespass offering. 40:40 And at the side without, as one goeth up to the entry of the
north gate, were two tables; and on the other side, which was at the
porch of the gate, were two tables. 40:41 Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by
the side of the gate; eight tables, whereupon they slew their
sacrifices. 40:42 And the four tables were of hewn stone for the burnt offering,
of a cubit and an half long, and a cubit and an half broad, and one
cubit high: whereupon also they laid the instruments wherewith they
slew the burnt offering and the sacrifice. 40:43 And within were hooks, an hand broad, fastened round about: and
upon the tables was the flesh of the offering. 40:44 And without the inner gate were the chambers of the singers in
the inner court, which was at the side of the north gate; and their
prospect was toward the south: one at the side of the east gate having
the prospect toward the north. 40:45 And he said unto me, This chamber, whose prospect is toward the
south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house. 40:46 And the chamber whose prospect is toward the north is for the
priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar: these are the sons of
Zadok among the sons of Levi, which come near to the LORD to minister
unto him. 40:47 So he measured the court, an hundred cubits long, and an hundred
cubits broad, foursquare; and the altar that was before the house. 40:48 And he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each
post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that
side: and the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and
three cubits on that side. 40:49 The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth
eleven cubits, and he brought me by the steps whereby they went up to
it: and there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another
on that side. 41:1 Afterward he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts,
six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other
side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle. 41:2 And the breadth of the door was ten cubits; and the sides of the
door were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other
side: and he measured the length thereof, forty cubits: and the
breadth, twenty cubits. 41:3 Then went he inward, and measured the post of the door, two
cubits; and the door, six cubits; and the breadth of the door, seven
cubits. 41:4 So he measured the length thereof, twenty cubits; and the
breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple: and he said unto me, This
is the most holy place. 41:5 After he measured the wall of the house, six cubits; and the
breadth of every side chamber, four cubits, round about the house on
every side. 41:6 And the side chambers were three, one over another, and thirty in
order; and they entered into the wall which was of the house for the
side chambers round about, that they might have hold, but they had not
hold in the wall of the house. 41:7 And there was an enlarging, and a winding about still upward to
the side chambers: for the winding about of the house went still
upward round about the house: therefore the breadth of the house was
still upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest
by the midst. 41:8 I saw also the height of the house round about: the foundations
of the side chambers were a full reed of six great cubits. 41:9 The thickness of the wall, which was for the side chamber
without, was five cubits: and that which was left was the place of the
side chambers that were within. 41:10 And between the chambers was the wideness of twenty cubits round
about the house on every side. 41:11 And the doors of the side chambers were toward the place that
was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the
south: and the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits
round about. 41:12 Now the building that was before the separate place at the end
toward the west was seventy cubits broad; and the wall of the building
was five cubits thick round about, and the length thereof ninety
cubits. 41:13 So he measured the house, an hundred cubits long; and the
separate place, and the building, with the walls thereof, an hundred
cubits long; 41:14 Also the breadth of the face of the house, and of
the separate place toward the east, an hundred cubits. 41:15 And he measured the length of the building over against the
separate place which was behind it, and the galleries thereof on the
one side and on the other side, an hundred cubits, with the inner
temple, and the porches of the court; 41:16 The door posts, and the
narrow windows, and the galleries round about on their three stories,
over against the door, cieled with wood round about, and from the
ground up to the windows, and the windows were covered; 41:17 To that
above the door, even unto the inner house, and without, and by all the
wall round about within and without, by measure. 41:18 And it was made with cherubims and palm trees, so that a palm
tree was between a cherub and a cherub; and every cherub had two
faces; 41:19 So that the face of a man was toward the palm tree on the
one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the
other side: it was made through all the house round about. 41:20 From the ground unto above the door were cherubims and palm
trees made, and on the wall of the temple. 41:21 The posts of the temple were squared, and the face of the
sanctuary; the appearance of the one as the appearance of the other. 41:22 The altar of wood was three cubits high, and the length thereof
two cubits; and the corners thereof, and the length thereof, and the
walls thereof, were of wood: and he said unto me, This is the table
that is before the LORD. 41:23 And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors. 41:24 And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves; two
leaves for the one door, and two leaves for the other door. 41:25 And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple,
cherubims and palm trees, like as were made upon the walls; and there
were thick planks upon the face of the porch without. 41:26 And there were narrow windows and palm trees on the one side and
on the other side, on the sides of the porch, and upon the side
chambers of the house, and thick planks. 42:1 Then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the
north: and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the
separate place, and which was before the building toward the north. 42:2 Before the length of an hundred cubits was the north door, and
the breadth was fifty cubits. 42:3 Over against the twenty cubits which were for the inner court,
and over against the pavement which was for the utter court, was
gallery against gallery in three stories. 42:4 And before the chambers was a walk to ten cubits breadth inward,
a way of one cubit; and their doors toward the north. 42:5 Now the upper chambers were shorter: for the galleries were
higher than these, than the lower, and than the middlemost of the
building. 42:6 For they were in three stories, but had not pillars as the
pillars of the courts: therefore the building was straitened more than
the lowest and the middlemost from the ground. 42:7 And the wall that was without over against the chambers, toward
the utter court on the forepart of the chambers, the length thereof
was fifty cubits. 42:8 For the length of the chambers that were in the utter court was
fifty cubits: and, lo, before the temple were an hundred cubits. 42:9 And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as
one goeth into them from the utter court. 42:10 The chambers were in the thickness of the wall of the court
toward the east, over against the separate place, and over against the
building. 42:11 And the way before them was like the appearance of the chambers
which were toward the north, as long as they, and as broad as they:
and all their goings out were both according to their fashions, and
according to their doors. 42:12 And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the
south was a door in the head of the way, even the way directly before
the wall toward the east, as one entereth into them. 42:13 Then said he unto me, The north chambers and the south chambers,
which are before the separate place, they be holy chambers, where the
priests that approach unto the LORD shall eat the most holy things:
there shall they lay the most holy things, and the meat offering, and
the sin offering, and the trespass offering; for the place is holy. 42:14 When the priests enter therein, then shall they not go out of
the holy place into the utter court, but there they shall lay their
garments wherein they minister; for they are holy; and shall put on
other garments, and shall approach to those things which are for the
people. 42:15 Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he
brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east,
and measured it round about. 42:16 He measured the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred
reeds, with the measuring reed round about. 42:17 He measured the north side, five hundred reeds, with the
measuring reed round about. 42:18 He measured the south side, five hundred reeds, with the
measuring reed. 42:19 He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred
reeds with the measuring reed. 42:20 He measured it by the four sides: it had a wall round about,
five hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad, to make a separation
between the sanctuary and the profane place. 43:1 Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looketh
toward the east: 43:2 And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came
from the way of the east: and his voice was like a noise of many
waters: and the earth shined with his glory. 43:3 And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw,
even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the
city: and the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river
Chebar; and I fell upon my face. 43:4 And the glory of the LORD came into the house by the way of the
gate whose prospect is toward the east. 43:5 So the spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court;
and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house. 43:6 And I heard him speaking unto me out of the house; and the man
stood by me. 43:7 And he said unto me, Son of man, the place of my throne, and the
place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the
children of Israel for ever, and my holy name, shall the house of
Israel no more defile, neither they, nor their kings, by their
whoredom, nor by the carcases of their kings in their high places. 43:8 In their setting of their threshold by my thresholds, and their
post by my posts, and the wall between me and them, they have even
defiled my holy name by their abominations that they have committed:
wherefore I have consumed them in mine anger. 43:9 Now let them put away their whoredom, and the carcases of their
kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them for ever. 43:10 Thou son of man, shew the house to the house of Israel, that
they may be ashamed of their iniquities: and let them measure the
pattern. 43:11 And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, shew them the
form of the house, and the fashion thereof, and the goings out
thereof, and the comings in thereof, and all the forms thereof, and
all the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the
laws thereof: and write it in their sight, that they may keep the
whole form thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them. 43:12 This is the law of the house; Upon the top of the mountain the
whole limit thereof round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is
the law of the house. 43:13 And these are the measures of the altar after the cubits: The
cubit is a cubit and an hand breadth; even the bottom shall be a
cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border thereof by the edge
thereof round about shall be a span: and this shall be the higher
place of the altar. 43:14 And from the bottom upon the ground even to the lower settle
shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit; and from the lesser
settle even to the greater settle shall be four cubits, and the
breadth one cubit. 43:15 So the altar shall be four cubits; and from the altar and upward
shall be four horns. 43:16 And the altar shall be twelve cubits long, twelve broad, square
in the four squares thereof. 43:17 And the settle shall be fourteen cubits long and fourteen broad
in the four squares thereof; and the border about it shall be half a
cubit; and the bottom thereof shall be a cubit about; and his stairs
shall look toward the east. 43:18 And he said unto me, Son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD; These
are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to
offer burnt offerings thereon, and to sprinkle blood thereon. 43:19 And thou shalt give to the priests the Levites that be of the
seed of Zadok, which approach unto me, to minister unto me, saith the
Lord GOD, a young bullock for a sin offering. 43:20 And thou shalt take of the blood thereof, and put it on the four
horns of it, and on the four corners of the settle, and upon the
border round about: thus shalt thou cleanse and purge it. 43:21 Thou shalt take the bullock also of the sin offering, and he
shall burn it in the appointed place of the house, without the
sanctuary. 43:22 And on the second day thou shalt offer a kid of the goats
without blemish for a sin offering; and they shall cleanse the altar,
as they did cleanse it with the bullock. 43:23 When thou hast made an end of cleansing it, thou shalt offer a
young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without
blemish. 43:24 And thou shalt offer them before the LORD, and the priests shall
cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt offering
unto the LORD. 43:25 Seven days shalt thou prepare every day a goat for a sin
offering: they shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of
the flock, without blemish. 43:26 Seven days shall they purge the altar and purify it; and they
shall consecrate themselves. 43:27 And when these days are expired, it shall be, that upon the
eighth day, and so forward, the priests shall make your burnt
offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings; and I will accept
you, saith the Lord GOD. 44:1 Then he brought me back the way of the gate of the outward
sanctuary which looketh toward the east; and it was shut. 44:2 Then said the LORD unto me; This gate shall be shut, it shall not
be opened, and no man shall enter in by it; because the LORD, the God
of Israel, hath entered in by it, therefore it shall be shut. 44:3 It is for the prince; the prince, he shall sit in it to eat bread
before the LORD; he shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate,
and shall go out by the way of the same. 44:4 Then brought he me the way of the north gate before the house:
and I looked, and, behold, the glory of the LORD filled the house of
the LORD: and I fell upon my face. 44:5 And the LORD said unto me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with
thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say unto thee
concerning all the ordinances of the house of the LORD, and all the
laws thereof; and mark well the entering in of the house, with every
going forth of the sanctuary. 44:6 And thou shalt say to the rebellious, even to the house of
Israel, Thus saith the Lord GOD; O ye house of Israel, let it suffice
you of all your abominations, 44:7 In that ye have brought into my
sanctuary strangers, uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in
flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to pollute it, even my house, when ye
offer my bread, the fat and the blood, and they have broken my
covenant because of all your abominations. 44:8 And ye have not kept the charge of mine holy things: but ye have
set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.