She tasted it, and
added now a little salt, and now a little more, till she thought it was
just to her mother's taste. "Oh! _I_ must taste it," said Bab, taking the basin up greedily. "Won't you take a spoon?" said Susan, trembling at the large mouthfuls
which Barbara sucked up with a terrible noise. "Take a spoonful, indeed!" exclaimed Barbara, setting down the basin in
high anger. "The next time I taste your broth you shall affront me, if
you dare! The next time I set my foot in this house, you shall be as
saucy to me as you please." And she flounced out of the house, repeating
"TAKE A SPOON, PIG, was what you meant to say." Susan stood in amazement at the beginning of this speech; but the
concluding words explained to her the mystery. Some years before this time, when Susan was a very little girl, and could
scarcely speak plain, as she was eating a basin of bread and milk for her
supper at the cottage door, a great pig came up, and put his nose into
the basin. Susan was willing that the pig should have some share of the
bread and milk; but as she ate with a spoon and he with his large mouth,
she presently discovered that he was likely to have more than his share;
and in a simple tone of expostulation she said to him, "Take a POON,
pig. "*  The saying become proverbial in the village. Susan's little
companions repeated it, and applied it upon many occasions, whenever
anyone claimed more than his share of anything good. Barbara, who was
then not Miss Barbara, but plain Bab, and who had played with all the
poor children in the neighbourhood, was often reproved in her unjust
methods of division by Susan's proverb. Susan, as she grew up, forgot
the childish saying; but the remembrance of it rankled in Barbara's mind,
and it was to this that she suspected Susan had alluded, when she
recommended a spoon to her, whilst she was swallowing the basin of broth. *This is a true anecdote. "La, miss," said Barbara's maid, when she found her mistress in a passion
upon her return from Susan's, "I only wondered you did her the honour to
set your foot within her doors. What need have you to trouble her for
news about the Abbey folks, when your own papa has been there all the
morning, and is just come in, and can tell you everything?" Barbara did not know that her father meant to go to the Abbey that
morning, for Attorney Case was mysterious even to his own family about
his morning rides. He never chose to be asked where he was going, or
where he had been; and this made his servants more than commonly
inquisitive to trace him. Barbara, against whose apparent childishness and real cunning he was not
sufficiently on his guard, had often the art of drawing him into
conversation about his visits. She ran into her father's parlour; but
she knew, the moment she saw his face, that it was no time to ask
questions; his pen was across his mouth, and his brown wig pushed oblique
upon his contracted forehead. The wig was always pushed crooked whenever
he was in a brown or rather, a black study. Barbara, who did not, like
Susan, bear with her father's testy humour from affection and gentleness
of disposition, but who always humoured him from artifice, tried all her
skill to fathom his thoughts, and when she found that it would not do,
she went to tell her maid so, and to complain that her father was so
cross there was no bearing him. It is true that Attorney Case was not in the happiest mood possible; for
he was by no means satisfied with his morning's work at the Abbey. Sir
Arthur Somers, the NEW MAN, did not suit him, and he began to be rather
apprehensive that he should not suit Sir Arthur. He had sound reasons
for his doubts. Sir Arthur Somers was an excellent lawyer, and a perfectly honest man. This seemed to our attorney a contradiction in terms; in the course of
his practice the case had not occurred; and he had no precedents ready to
direct his proceedings. Sir Arthur was also a man of wit and eloquence,
yet of plain dealing and humanity. The attorney could not persuade
himself to believe that his benevolence was anything but enlightened
cunning, and his plain dealing he one minute dreaded as the masterpiece
of art, and the next despised as the characteristic of folly. In short,
he had not yet decided whether he was an honest man or a knave. He had
settled accounts with him for his late agency, and had talked about
sundry matters of business. He constantly perceived, however, that he
could not impose upon Sir Arthur; but the idea that he could know all the
mazes of the law, and yet prefer the straight road, was incomprehensible. Mr. Case, having paid Sir Arthur some compliments on his great legal
abilities, and his high reputation at the bar, he coolly replied, "I have
left the bar." The attorney looked in unfeigned astonishment, that a man
who was actually making 3,OOO pounds per annum at the bar should leave
it. "I am come," said Sir Arthur, "to enjoy that kind of domestic life in the
country which I prefer to all others, and amongst people whose happiness
I hope to increase." At this speech the attorney changed his ground,
flattering himself that he should find his man averse to business, and
ignorant of country affairs. He talked of the value of land, and of new
leases. Sir Arthur wished to enlarge his domain, and to make a ride round it. A
map of it was lying upon the table, and Farmer Price's garden came
exactly across the new road for the ride. Sir Arthur looked
disappointed; and the keen attorney seized the moment to inform him that
"Price's whole land was at his disposal." "At my disposal! how so?" cried Sir Arthur, eagerly; "it will not be out
of lease, I believe, these ten years. I'll look into the rent roll
again; perhaps I am mistaken." "You are mistaken, my good sir, and you are not mistaken," said Mr. Case,
with a shrewd smile. "In one sense, the land will not be out of lease
these ten years, and in another it is out of lease at this present time. To come to the point at once, the lease is, ab origine, null and void. I
have detected a capital flaw in the body of it. I pledge my credit upon
it, sir, it can't stand a single term in law or equity." The attorney observed, that at these words Sir Arthur's eye was fixed
with a look of earnest attention. "Now I have him," said the cunning
tempter to himself. "Neither in law nor equity," repeated Sir Arthur, with apparent
incredulity. "Are you sure of that, Mr. Case?" "Sure! As I told you before, sir, I'd pledge my whole credit upon the
thing--I'd stake my existence." "THAT'S SOMETHING," said Sir Arthur, as if he was pondering upon the
matter. The attorney went on with all the eagerness of a keen man, who sees a
chance at one stroke of winning a rich friend, and of ruining a poor
enemy. He explained, with legal volubility and technical amplification,
the nature of the mistake in Mr. Price's lease. "It was, sir," said he,
"a lease for the life of Peter Price, Susanna his wife, and to the
survivor or survivors of them, or for the full time and term of twenty
years, to be computed from the first day of May then next ensuing. Now,
sir, this, you see, is a lease in reversion, which the late Sir Benjamin
Somers had not, by his settlement, a right to make. This is a curious
mistake, you see, Sir Arthur; and in filling up those printed leases
there's always a good chance of some flaw. I find it perpetually; but I
never found a better than this in the whole course of my practice." Sir Arthur stood in silence. "My dear sir," said the attorney, taking him by the button, "you have no
scruple of stirring in this business?" "A little," said Sir Arthur. "Why, then, that can be done away in a moment. Your name shall not
appear in it at all. You have nothing to do but to make over the lease
to me. I make all safe to you with my bond. Now, being in possession, I
come forward in my own proper person. SHALL I PROCEED?" "No--you have said enough," replied Sir Arthur. "The case, indeed, lies in a nutshell," said the attorney, who had by
this time worked himself up to such a pitch of professional enthusiasm,
that, intent upon his vision of a lawsuit, he totally forgot to observe
the impression his words made upon Sir Arthur. "There's only one thing we have forgotten all this time," said Sir
Arthur. "What can that be, sir?" "That we shall ruin this poor man." Case was thunderstruck at these words, or rather, by the look which
accompanied them. He recollected that he had laid himself open before he
was sure of Sir Arthur's REAL character. He softened, and said he should
have had certainly more CONSIDERATION in the case of any but a litigious,
pig-headed fellow, as he knew Price to be. "If he be litigious," said Sir Arthur, "I shall certainly be glad to get
him fairly out of the parish as soon as possible. When you go home, you
will be so good, sir, as to send me his lease, that I may satisfy myself
before we stir in this business." The attorney, brightening up, prepared to take leave; but he could not
persuade himself to take his departure without making one push at Sir
Arthur about the agency. "I will not trouble you, Sir Arthur, with this lease of Price's," said
Case; "I'll leave it with your agent. Whom shall I apply to?" "TO MYSELF, sir, if you please," replied Sir Arthur. The courtiers of Louis the Fourteenth could not have looked more
astounded than our attorney, when they received from their monarch a
similar answer. It was this unexpected reply of Sir Arthur's which had
deranged the temper of Mr. Case, and caused his wig to stand so crooked
upon his forehead, and which had rendered him impenetrably silent to his
inquisitive daughter Barbara. After having walked up and down his room, conversing with himself, for
some time, the attorney concluded that the agency must be given to
somebody when Sir Arthur should have to attend his duty in Parliament;
that the agency, even for the winter season, was not a thing to be
neglected; and that, if he managed well, he might yet secure it for
himself. He had often found that small timely presents worked
wonderfully upon his own mind, and he judged of others by himself. The
tenants had been in the reluctant but constant practice of making him
continual petty offerings; and he resolved to try the same course with
Sir Arthur, whose resolution to be his own agent, he thought, argued a
close, saving, avaricious disposition. He had heard the housekeeper at
the Abbey inquiring, as he passed through the servants, whether there was
any lamb to be gotten? She said that Sir Arthur was remarkably fond of
lamb, and that she wished she could get a quarter for him. Immediately
he sallied into his kitchen, as soon as the idea struck him, and asked a
shepherd, who was waiting there, whether he knew of a nice fat lamb to be
had anywhere in the neighbourhood. "I know of one," cried Barbara. "Susan Price has a pet lamb that's as
fat as fat could be."