You seem to me colder than a lump of stone; but I am willing to
believe that you may at some time have loved a cat, or a dog, or
a child. When you were a baby, I suppose you loved your mother. Talk about love, then, till the world is sick of the word. But
don't you talk about Christianity. Don't you dare to say one
word, white or black, about it. Christianity is, as far as you
are concerned, a horrible mystery. Keep clear of it, keep silent
upon it, as you would upon an abomination. It is a thing that has
made men slay and torture each other; and you will never know
why. It is a thing that has made men do evil that good might
come; and you will never understand the evil, let alone the good. Christianity is a thing that could only make you vomit, till you
are other than you are. I would not justify it to you even if I
could. Hate it, in God's name, as Turnbull does, who is a man. It is a monstrous thing, for which men die. And if you will stand
here and talk about love for another ten minutes it is very
probable that you will see a man die for it." And he fell on guard. Turnbull was busy settling something loose
in his elaborate hilt, and the pause was broken by the stranger. "Suppose I call the police?" he said, with a heated face. "And deny your most sacred dogma," said MacIan. "Dogma!" cried the man, in a sort of dismay. "Oh, we have no
_dogmas_, you know!" There was another silence, and he said again, airily:

"You know, I think, there's something in what Shaw teaches about
no moral principles being quite fixed. Have you ever read _The
Quintessence of Ibsenism_? Of course he went very wrong over the
war." Turnbull, with a bent, flushed face, was tying up the loose piece
of the pommel with string. With the string in his teeth, he said,
"Oh, make up your damned mind and clear out!" "It's a serious thing," said the philosopher, shaking his head. "I must be alone and consider which is the higher point of view. I rather feel that in a case so extreme as this..." and he went
slowly away. As he disappeared among the trees, they heard him
murmuring in a sing-song voice, "New occasions teach new duties,"
out of a poem by James Russell Lowell. "Ah," said MacIan, drawing a deep breath. "Don't you believe in
prayer now? I prayed for an angel." "An hour ago," said the Highlander, in his heavy meditative
voice, "I felt the devil weakening my heart and my oath against
you, and I prayed that God would send an angel to my aid." "Well?" inquired the other, finishing his mending and wrapping
the rest of the string round his hand to get a firmer grip. "Well?" "Well, that man was an angel," said MacIan. "I didn't know they were as bad as that," answered Turnbull. "We know that devils sometimes quote Scripture and counterfeit
good," replied the mystic. "Why should not angels sometimes come
to show us the black abyss of evil on whose brink we stand. If
that man had not tried to stop us...I might...I might have
stopped." "I know what you mean," said Turnbull, grimly. "But then he came," broke out MacIan, "and my soul said to me:
'Give up fighting, and you will become like That. Give up vows
and dogmas, and fixed things, and you may grow like That. You may
learn, also, that fog of false philosophy. You may grow fond of
that mire of crawling, cowardly morals, and you may come to think
a blow bad, because it hurts, and not because it humiliates. You
may come to think murder wrong, because it is violent, and not
because it is unjust. Oh, you blasphemer of the good, an hour ago
I almost loved you! But do not fear for me now. I have heard the
word Love pronounced in _his_ intonation; and I know exactly what
it means. On guard!'" The swords caught on each other with a dreadful clang and jar,
full of the old energy and hate; and at once plunged and
replunged. Once more each man's heart had become the magnet of a
mad sword. Suddenly, furious as they were, they were frozen for a
moment motionless. "What noise is that?" asked the Highlander, hoarsely. "I think I know," replied Turnbull. "What?... What?" cried the other. "The student of Shaw and Tolstoy has made up his remarkable
mind," said Turnbull, quietly. "The police are coming up the
hill." VI. THE OTHER PHILOSOPHER

Between high hedges in Hertfordshire, hedges so high as to create
a kind of grove, two men were running. They did not run in a
scampering or feverish manner, but in the steady swing of the
pendulum. Across the great plains and uplands to the right and
left of the lane, a long tide of sunset light rolled like a sea
of ruby, lighting up the long terraces of the hills and picking
out the few windows of the scattered hamlets in startling
blood-red sparks. But the lane was cut deep in the hill and
remained in an abrupt shadow. The two men running in it had an
impression not uncommonly experienced between those wild green
English walls; a sense of being led between the walls of a maze. Though their pace was steady it was vigorous; their faces were
heated and their eyes fixed and bright. There was, indeed,
something a little mad in the contrast between the evening's
stillness over the empty country-side, and these two figures
fleeing wildly from nothing. They had the look of two lunatics,
possibly they were. "Are you all right?" said Turnbull, with civility. "Can you keep
this up?" "Quite easily, thank you," replied MacIan. "I run very well." "Is that a qualification in a family of warriors?" asked
Turnbull. "Undoubtedly. Rapid movement is essential," answered MacIan, who
never saw a joke in his life. Turnbull broke out into a short laugh, and silence fell between
them, the panting silence of runners. Then MacIan said: "We run better than any of those policemen. They are too fat. Why do you make your policemen so fat?" "I didn't do much towards making them fat myself," replied
Turnbull, genially, "but I flatter myself that I am now doing
something towards making them thin. You'll see they will be as
lean as rakes by the time they catch us. They will look like your
friend, Cardinal Manning." "But they won't catch us," said MacIan, in his literal way. "No, we beat them in the great military art of running away,"
returned the other. "They won't catch us unless----"

MacIan turned his long equine face inquiringly. "Unless what?" he
said, for Turnbull had gone silent suddenly, and seemed to be
listening intently as he ran as a horse does with his ears turned
back. "Unless what?" repeated the Highlander. "Unless they do--what they have done. Listen." MacIan slackened
his trot, and turned his head to the trail they had left behind
them. Across two or three billows of the up and down lane came
along the ground the unmistakable throbbing of horses' hoofs.