11:25 And whosoever beareth ought of the carcase of them shall wash
his clothes, and be unclean until the even. 11:26 The carcases of every beast which divideth the hoof, and is not
clovenfooted, nor cheweth the cud, are unclean unto you: every one
that toucheth them shall be unclean. 11:27 And whatsoever goeth upon his paws, among all manner of beasts
that go on all four, those are unclean unto you: whoso toucheth their
carcase shall be unclean until the even. 11:28 And he that beareth the carcase of them shall wash his clothes,
and be unclean until the even: they are unclean unto you. 11:29 These also shall be unclean unto you among the creeping things
that creep upon the earth; the weasel, and the mouse, and the tortoise
after his kind, 11:30 And the ferret, and the chameleon, and the
lizard, and the snail, and the mole. 11:31 These are unclean to you among all that creep: whosoever doth
touch them, when they be dead, shall be unclean until the even. 11:32 And upon whatsoever any of them, when they are dead, doth fall,
it shall be unclean; whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or
skin, or sack, whatsoever vessel it be, wherein any work is done, it
must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the even; so it
shall be cleansed. 11:33 And every earthen vessel, whereinto any of them falleth,
whatsoever is in it shall be unclean; and ye shall break it. 11:34 Of all meat which may be eaten, that on which such water cometh
shall be unclean: and all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel
shall be unclean. 11:35 And every thing whereupon any part of their carcase falleth
shall be unclean; whether it be oven, or ranges for pots, they shall
be broken down: for they are unclean and shall be unclean unto you. 11:36 Nevertheless a fountain or pit, wherein there is plenty of
water, shall be clean: but that which toucheth their carcase shall be
unclean. 11:37 And if any part of their carcase fall upon any sowing seed which
is to be sown, it shall be clean. 11:38 But if any water be put upon the seed, and any part of their
carcase fall thereon, it shall be unclean unto you. 11:39 And if any beast, of which ye may eat, die; he that toucheth the
carcase thereof shall be unclean until the even. 11:40 And he that eateth of the carcase of it shall wash his clothes,
and be unclean until the even: he also that beareth the carcase of it
shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the even. 11:41 And every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth shall be
an abomination; it shall not be eaten. 11:42 Whatsoever goeth upon the belly, and whatsoever goeth upon all
four, or whatsoever hath more feet among all creeping things that
creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat; for they are an
abomination. 11:43 Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing
that creepeth, neither shall ye make yourselves unclean with them,
that ye should be defiled thereby. 11:44 For I am the LORD your God: ye shall therefore sanctify
yourselves, and ye shall be holy; for I am holy: neither shall ye
defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that creepeth upon
the earth. 11:45 For I am the LORD that bringeth you up out of the land of Egypt,
to be your God: ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy. 11:46 This is the law of the beasts, and of the fowl, and of every
living creature that moveth in the waters, and of every creature that
creepeth upon the earth: 11:47 To make a difference between the
unclean and the clean, and between the beast that may be eaten and the
beast that may not be eaten. 12:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 12:2 Speak unto the
children of Israel, saying, If a woman have conceived seed, and born a
man child: then she shall be unclean seven days; according to the days
of the separation for her infirmity shall she be unclean. 12:3 And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be
circumcised. 12:4 And she shall then continue in the blood of her purifying three
and thirty days; she shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the
sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled. 12:5 But if she bear a maid child, then she shall be unclean two
weeks, as in her separation: and she shall continue in the blood of
her purifying threescore and six days. 12:6 And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or
for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb of the first year for a burnt
offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering,
unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest:
12:7 Who shall offer it before the LORD, and make an atonement for
her; and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood. This is
the law for her that hath born a male or a female. 12:8 And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she shall bring two
turtles, or two young pigeons; the one for the burnt offering, and the
other for a sin offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for
her, and she shall be clean. 13:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and Aaron, saying, 13:2 When a man
shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, a scab, or bright spot,
and it be in the skin of his flesh like the plague of leprosy; then he
shall be brought unto Aaron the priest, or unto one of his sons the
priests: 13:3 And the priest shall look on the plague in the skin of
the flesh: and when the hair in the plague is turned white, and the
plague in sight be deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a plague
of leprosy: and the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him
unclean. 13:4 If the bright spot be white in the skin of his flesh, and in
sight be not deeper than the skin, and the hair thereof be not turned
white; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague seven
days: 13:5 And the priest shall look on him the seventh day: and,
behold, if the plague in his sight be at a stay, and the plague spread
not in the skin; then the priest shall shut him up seven days more:
13:6 And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day: and,
behold, if the plague be somewhat dark, and the plague spread not in
the skin, the priest shall pronounce him clean: it is but a scab: and
he shall wash his clothes, and be clean. 13:7 But if the scab spread much abroad in the skin, after that he
hath been seen of the priest for his cleansing, he shall be seen of
the priest again. 13:8 And if the priest see that, behold, the scab spreadeth in the
skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a leprosy. 13:9 When the plague of leprosy is in a man, then he shall be brought
unto the priest; 13:10 And the priest shall see him: and, behold, if
the rising be white in the skin, and it have turned the hair white,
and there be quick raw flesh in the rising; 13:11 It is an old leprosy
in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean,
and shall not shut him up: for he is unclean. 13:12 And if a leprosy break out abroad in the skin, and the leprosy
cover all the skin of him that hath the plague from his head even to
his foot, wheresoever the priest looketh; 13:13 Then the priest shall
consider: and, behold, if the leprosy have covered all his flesh, he
shall pronounce him clean that hath the plague: it is all turned
white: he is clean. 13:14 But when raw flesh appeareth in him, he shall be unclean. 13:15 And the priest shall see the raw flesh, and pronounce him to be
unclean: for the raw flesh is unclean: it is a leprosy. 13:16 Or if the raw flesh turn again, and be changed unto white, he
shall come unto the priest; 13:17 And the priest shall see him: and,
behold, if the plague be turned into white; then the priest shall
pronounce him clean that hath the plague: he is clean. 13:18 The flesh also, in which, even in the skin thereof, was a boil,
and is healed, 13:19 And in the place of the boil there be a white
rising, or a bright spot, white, and somewhat reddish, and it be
shewed to the priest; 13:20 And if, when the priest seeth it, behold,
it be in sight lower than the skin, and the hair thereof be turned
white; the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a plague of
leprosy broken out of the boil. 13:21 But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white
hairs therein, and if it be not lower than the skin, but be somewhat
dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 13:22 And if it
spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him
unclean: it is a plague. 13:23 But if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not, it is
a burning boil; and the priest shall pronounce him clean. 13:24 Or if there be any flesh, in the skin whereof there is a hot
burning, and the quick flesh that burneth have a white bright spot,
somewhat reddish, or white; 13:25 Then the priest shall look upon it:
and, behold, if the hair in the bright spot be turned white, and it be
in sight deeper than the skin; it is a leprosy broken out of the
burning: wherefore the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is the
plague of leprosy. 13:26 But if the priest look on it, and, behold, there be no white
hair in the bright spot, and it be no lower than the other skin, but
be somewhat dark; then the priest shall shut him up seven days: 13:27
And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day: and if it be
spread much abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him
unclean: it is the plague of leprosy. 13:28 And if the bright spot stay in his place, and spread not in the
skin, but it be somewhat dark; it is a rising of the burning, and the
priest shall pronounce him clean: for it is an inflammation of the
burning. 13:29 If a man or woman have a plague upon the head or the beard;
13:30 Then the priest shall see the plague: and, behold, if it be in
sight deeper than the skin; and there be in it a yellow thin hair;
then the priest shall pronounce him unclean: it is a dry scall, even a
leprosy upon the head or beard. 13:31 And if the priest look on the plague of the scall, and, behold,
it be not in sight deeper than the skin, and that there is no black
hair in it; then the priest shall shut up him that hath the plague of
the scall seven days: 13:32 And in the seventh day the priest shall
look on the plague: and, behold, if the scall spread not, and there be
in it no yellow hair, and the scall be not in sight deeper than the
skin; 13:33 He shall be shaven, but the scall shall he not shave; and
the priest shall shut up him that hath the scall seven days more:
13:34 And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall: and,
behold, if the scall be not spread in the skin, nor be in sight deeper
than the skin; then the priest shall pronounce him clean: and he shall
wash his clothes, and be clean. 13:35 But if the scall spread much in the skin after his cleansing;
13:36 Then the priest shall look on him: and, behold, if the scall be
spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for yellow hair; he is
unclean. 13:37 But if the scall be in his sight at a stay, and that there is
black hair grown up therein; the scall is healed, he is clean: and the
priest shall pronounce him clean. 13:38 If a man also or a woman have in the skin of their flesh bright
spots, even white bright spots; 13:39 Then the priest shall look: and,
behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh be darkish
white; it is a freckled spot that groweth in the skin; he is clean. 13:40 And the man whose hair is fallen off his head, he is bald; yet
is he clean. 13:41 And he that hath his hair fallen off from the part of his head
toward his face, he is forehead bald: yet is he clean. 13:42 And if there be in the bald head, or bald forehead, a white
reddish sore; it is a leprosy sprung up in his bald head, or his bald
forehead. 13:43 Then the priest shall look upon it: and, behold, if the rising
of the sore be white reddish in his bald head, or in his bald
forehead, as the leprosy appeareth in the skin of the flesh; 13:44 He
is a leprous man, he is unclean: the priest shall pronounce him
utterly unclean; his plague is in his head. 13:45 And the leper in whom the plague is, his clothes shall be rent,
and his head bare, and he shall put a covering upon his upper lip, and
shall cry, Unclean, unclean. 13:46 All the days wherein the plague shall be in him he shall be
defiled; he is unclean: he shall dwell alone; without the camp shall
his habitation be. 13:47 The garment also that the plague of leprosy is in, whether it be
a woollen garment, or a linen garment; 13:48 Whether it be in the
warp, or woof; of linen, or of woollen; whether in a skin, or in any
thing made of skin; 13:49 And if the plague be greenish or reddish in
the garment, or in the skin, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in
any thing of skin; it is a plague of leprosy, and shall be shewed unto
the priest: 13:50 And the priest shall look upon the plague, and shut
up it that hath the plague seven days: 13:51 And he shall look on the
plague on the seventh day: if the plague be spread in the garment,
either in the warp, or in the woof, or in a skin, or in any work that
is made of skin; the plague is a fretting leprosy; it is unclean. 13:52 He shall therefore burn that garment, whether warp or woof, in
woollen or in linen, or any thing of skin, wherein the plague is: for
it is a fretting leprosy; it shall be burnt in the fire. 13:53 And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the plague be not
spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in any
thing of skin; 13:54 Then the priest shall command that they wash the
thing wherein the plague is, and he shall shut it up seven days more:
13:55 And the priest shall look on the plague, after that it is
washed: and, behold, if the plague have not changed his colour, and
the plague be not spread; it is unclean; thou shalt burn it in the
fire; it is fret inward, whether it be bare within or without. 13:56 And if the priest look, and, behold, the plague be somewhat dark
after the washing of it; then he shall rend it out of the garment, or
out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof: 13:57 And if
it appear still in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or
in any thing of skin; it is a spreading plague: thou shalt burn that
wherein the plague is with fire. 13:58 And the garment, either warp, or woof, or whatsoever thing of
skin it be, which thou shalt wash, if the plague be departed from
them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean. 13:59 This is the law of the plague of leprosy in a garment of woollen
or linen, either in the warp, or woof, or any thing of skins, to
pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean. 14:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 14:2 This shall be the law
of the leper in the day of his cleansing: He shall be brought unto the
priest: 14:3 And the priest shall go forth out of the camp; and the
priest shall look, and, behold, if the plague of leprosy be healed in
the leper; 14:4 Then shall the priest command to take for him that is
to be cleansed two birds alive and clean, and cedar wood, and scarlet,
and hyssop: 14:5 And the priest shall command that one of the birds be
killed in an earthen vessel over running water: 14:6 As for the living
bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the
hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the
bird that was killed over the running water: 14:7 And he shall
sprinkle upon him that is to be cleansed from the leprosy seven times,
and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird loose
into the open field. 14:8 And he that is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave
off all his hair, and wash himself in water, that he may be clean: and
after that he shall come into the camp, and shall tarry abroad out of
his tent seven days. 14:9 But it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his
hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he
shall shave off: and he shall wash his clothes, also he shall wash his
flesh in water, and he shall be clean. 14:10 And on the eighth day he shall take two he lambs without
blemish, and one ewe lamb of the first year without blemish, and three
tenth deals of fine flour for a meat offering, mingled with oil, and
one log of oil. 14:11 And the priest that maketh him clean shall present the man that
is to be made clean, and those things, before the LORD, at the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation: 14:12 And the priest shall take
one he lamb, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log of
oil, and wave them for a wave offering before the LORD: 14:13 And he
shall slay the lamb in the place where he shall kill the sin offering
and the burnt offering, in the holy place: for as the sin offering is
the priest's, so is the trespass offering: it is most holy: 14:14 And
the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass offering, and
the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is
to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the
great toe of his right foot: 14:15 And the priest shall take some of
the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand: 14:16
And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his
left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times
before the LORD: 14:17 And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand
shall the priest put upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to
be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great
toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering: 14:18
And the remnant of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall pour
upon the head of him that is to be cleansed: and the priest shall make
an atonement for him before the LORD. 14:19 And the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make an
atonement for him that is to be cleansed from his uncleanness; and
afterward he shall kill the burnt offering: 14:20 And the priest shall
offer the burnt offering and the meat offering upon the altar: and the
priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be clean. 14:21 And if he be poor, and cannot get so much; then he shall take
one lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make an atonement for
him, and one tenth deal of fine flour mingled with oil for a meat
offering, and a log of oil; 14:22 And two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons, such as he is able to get; and the one shall be a sin
offering, and the other a burnt offering. 14:23 And he shall bring them on the eighth day for his cleansing unto
the priest, unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
before the LORD. 14:24 And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and
the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering
before the LORD: 14:25 And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass
offering, and the priest shall take some of the blood of the trespass
offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to
be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great
toe of his right foot: 14:26 And the priest shall pour of the oil into
the palm of his own left hand: 14:27 And the priest shall sprinkle
with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven
times before the LORD: 14:28 And the priest shall put of the oil that
is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him that is to be
cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe
of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass
offering: 14:29 And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand
he shall put upon the head of him that is to be cleansed, to make an
atonement for him before the LORD. 14:30 And he shall offer the one of the turtledoves, or of the young
pigeons, such as he can get; 14:31 Even such as he is able to get, the
one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the
meat offering: and the priest shall make an atonement for him that is
to be cleansed before the LORD. 14:32 This is the law of him in whom is the plague of leprosy, whose
hand is not able to get that which pertaineth to his cleansing. 14:33 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 14:34 When
ye be come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a
possession, and I put the plague of leprosy in a house of the land of
your possession; 14:35 And he that owneth the house shall come and
tell the priest, saying, It seemeth to me there is as it were a plague
in the house: 14:36 Then the priest shall command that they empty the
house, before the priest go into it to see the plague, that all that
is in the house be not made unclean: and afterward the priest shall go
in to see the house: 14:37 And he shall look on the plague, and,
behold, if the plague be in the walls of the house with hollow
strakes, greenish or reddish, which in sight are lower than the wall;
14:38 Then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the
house, and shut up the house seven days: 14:39 And the priest shall
come again the seventh day, and shall look: and, behold, if the plague
be spread in the walls of the house; 14:40 Then the priest shall
command that they take away the stones in which the plague is, and
they shall cast them into an unclean place without the city: 14:41 And
he shall cause the house to be scraped within round about, and they
shall pour out the dust that they scrape off without the city into an
unclean place: 14:42 And they shall take other stones, and put them in
the place of those stones; and he shall take other morter, and shall
plaister the house. 14:43 And if the plague come again, and break out in the house, after
that he hath taken away the stones, and after he hath scraped the
house, and after it is plaistered; 14:44 Then the priest shall come
and look, and, behold, if the plague be spread in the house, it is a
fretting leprosy in the house; it is unclean. 14:45 And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the
timber thereof, and all the morter of the house; and he shall carry
them forth out of the city into an unclean place. 14:46 Moreover he that goeth into the house all the while that it is
shut up shall be unclean until the even. 14:47 And he that lieth in the house shall wash his clothes; and he
that eateth in the house shall wash his clothes. 14:48 And if the priest shall come in, and look upon it, and, behold,
the plague hath not spread in the house, after the house was
plaistered: then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because
the plague is healed. 14:49 And he shall take to cleanse the house two birds, and cedar
wood, and scarlet, and hyssop: 14:50 And he shall kill the one of the
birds in an earthen vessel over running water: 14:51 And he shall take
the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird,
and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water,
and sprinkle the house seven times: 14:52 And he shall cleanse the
house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with
the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and
with the scarlet: 14:53 But he shall let go the living bird out of the
city into the open fields, and make an atonement for the house: and it
shall be clean. 14:54 This is the law for all manner of plague of leprosy, and scall,
14:55 And for the leprosy of a garment, and of a house, 14:56 And for
a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot: 14:57 To teach when
it is unclean, and when it is clean: this is the law of leprosy. 15:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and to Aaron, saying, 15:2 Speak
unto the children of Israel, and say unto them, When any man hath a
running issue out of his flesh, because of his issue he is unclean. 15:3 And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue: whether his flesh
run with his issue, or his flesh be stopped from his issue, it is his
uncleanness. 15:4 Every bed, whereon he lieth that hath the issue, is unclean: and
every thing, whereon he sitteth, shall be unclean. 15:5 And whosoever toucheth his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 15:6 And he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the
issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be
unclean until the even. 15:7 And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even. 15:8 And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean; then
he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean
until the even. 15:9 And what saddle soever he rideth upon that hath the issue shall
be unclean. 15:10 And whosoever toucheth any thing that was under him shall be
unclean until the even: and he that beareth any of those things shall
wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even. 15:11 And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue, and hath not
rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 15:12 And the vessel of earth, that he toucheth which hath the issue,
shall be broken: and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water. 15:13 And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue; then he
shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his
clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean. 15:14 And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtledoves, or
two young pigeons, and come before the LORD unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and give them unto the priest: 15:15
And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering; and the priest shall make an atonement for
him before the LORD for his issue. 15:16 And if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he
shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the even. 15:17 And every garment, and every skin, whereon is the seed of
copulation, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even. 15:18 The woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation,
they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the
even. 15:19 And if a woman have an issue, and her issue in her flesh be
blood, she shall be put apart seven days: and whosoever toucheth her
shall be unclean until the even. 15:20 And every thing that she lieth upon in her separation shall be
unclean: every thing also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean. 15:21 And whosoever toucheth her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe
himself in water, and be unclean until the even. 15:22 And whosoever toucheth any thing that she sat upon shall wash
his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the
even. 15:23 And if it be on her bed, or on any thing whereon she sitteth,
when he toucheth it, he shall be unclean until the even.