1:48 For the LORD had spoken unto Moses, saying, 1:49 Only thou shalt
not number the tribe of Levi, neither take the sum of them among the
children of Israel: 1:50 But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the
tabernacle of testimony, and over all the vessels thereof, and over
all things that belong to it: they shall bear the tabernacle, and all
the vessels thereof; and they shall minister unto it, and shall encamp
round about the tabernacle. 1:51 And when the tabernacle setteth forward, the Levites shall take
it down: and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall
set it up: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put to death. 1:52 And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by
his own camp, and every man by his own standard, throughout their
hosts. 1:53 But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of
testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the
children of Israel: and the Levites shall keep the charge of the
tabernacle of testimony. 1:54 And the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD
commanded Moses, so did they. 2:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 2:2 Every
man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with
the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle of
the congregation shall they pitch. 2:3 And on the east side toward the rising of the sun shall they of
the standard of the camp of Judah pitch throughout their armies: and
Nahshon the son of Amminadab shall be captain of the children of
Judah. 2:4 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred. 2:5 And those that do pitch next unto him shall be the tribe of
Issachar: and Nethaneel the son of Zuar shall be captain of the
children of Issachar. 2:6 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
four thousand and four hundred. 2:7 Then the tribe of Zebulun: and Eliab the son of Helon shall be
captain of the children of Zebulun. 2:8 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were fifty and
seven thousand and four hundred. 2:9 All that were numbered in the camp of Judah were an hundred
thousand and fourscore thousand and six thousand and four hundred,
throughout their armies. These shall first set forth. 2:10 On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben
according to their armies: and the captain of the children of Reuben
shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur. 2:11 And his host, and those that were numbered thereof, were forty
and six thousand and five hundred. 2:12 And those which pitch by him shall be the tribe of Simeon: and
the captain of the children of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of
Zurishaddai. 2:13 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty
and nine thousand and three hundred. 2:14 Then the tribe of Gad: and the captain of the sons of Gad shall
be Eliasaph the son of Reuel. 2:15 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
and five thousand and six hundred and fifty. 2:16 All that were numbered in the camp of Reuben were an hundred
thousand and fifty and one thousand and four hundred and fifty,
throughout their armies. And they shall set forth in the second rank. 2:17 Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall set forward with
the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp: as they encamp, so
shall they set forward, every man in his place by their standards. 2:18 On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim
according to their armies: and the captain of the sons of Ephraim
shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud. 2:19 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
thousand and five hundred. 2:20 And by him shall be the tribe of Manasseh: and the captain of the
children of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. 2:21 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty
and two thousand and two hundred. 2:22 Then the tribe of Benjamin: and the captain of the sons of
Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni. 2:23 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were thirty
and five thousand and four hundred. 2:24 All that were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were an hundred
thousand and eight thousand and an hundred, throughout their armies. And they shall go forward in the third rank. 2:25 The standard of the camp of Dan shall be on the north side by
their armies: and the captain of the children of Dan shall be Ahiezer
the son of Ammishaddai. 2:26 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were
threescore and two thousand and seven hundred. 2:27 And those that encamp by him shall be the tribe of Asher: and the
captain of the children of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ocran. 2:28 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were forty
and one thousand and five hundred. 2:29 Then the tribe of Naphtali: and the captain of the children of
Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan. 2:30 And his host, and those that were numbered of them, were fifty
and three thousand and four hundred. 2:31 All they that were numbered in the camp of Dan were an hundred
thousand and fifty and seven thousand and six hundred. They shall go
hindmost with their standards. 2:32 These are those which were numbered of the children of Israel by
the house of their fathers: all those that were numbered of the camps
throughout their hosts were six hundred thousand and three thousand
and five hundred and fifty. 2:33 But the Levites were not numbered among the children of Israel;
as the LORD commanded Moses. 2:34 And the children of Israel did according to all that the LORD
commanded Moses: so they pitched by their standards, and so they set
forward, every one after their families, according to the house of
their fathers. 3:1 These also are the generations of Aaron and Moses in the day that
the LORD spake with Moses in mount Sinai. 3:2 And these are the names of the sons of Aaron; Nadab the firstborn,
and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar. 3:3 These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests which were
anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office. 3:4 And Nadab and Abihu died before the LORD, when they offered
strange fire before the LORD, in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had
no children: and Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's office
in the sight of Aaron their father. 3:5 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 3:6 Bring the tribe of Levi
near, and present them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister
unto him. 3:7 And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole
congregation before the tabernacle of the congregation, to do the
service of the tabernacle. 3:8 And they shall keep all the instruments of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and the charge of the children of Israel, to do the
service of the tabernacle. 3:9 And thou shalt give the Levites unto Aaron and to his sons: they
are wholly given unto him out of the children of Israel. 3:10 And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall wait on
their priest's office: and the stranger that cometh nigh shall be put
to death. 3:11 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 3:12 And I, behold, I have
taken the Levites from among the children of Israel instead of all the
firstborn that openeth the matrix among the children of Israel:
therefore the Levites shall be mine; 3:13 Because all the firstborn
are mine; for on the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of
Egypt I hallowed unto me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and
beast: mine shall they be: I am the LORD. 3:14 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,
3:15 Number the children of Levi after the house of their fathers, by
their families: every male from a month old and upward shalt thou
number them. 3:16 And Moses numbered them according to the word of the LORD, as he
was commanded. 3:17 And these were the sons of Levi by their names; Gershon, and
Kohath, and Merari. 3:18 And these are the names of the sons of Gershon by their families;
Libni, and Shimei. 3:19 And the sons of Kohath by their families; Amram, and Izehar,
Hebron, and Uzziel. 3:20 And the sons of Merari by their families; Mahli, and Mushi. These
are the families of the Levites according to the house of their
fathers. 3:21 Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the
Shimites: these are the families of the Gershonites. 3:22 Those that were numbered of them, according to the number of all
the males, from a month old and upward, even those that were numbered
of them were seven thousand and five hundred. 3:23 The families of the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle
westward. 3:24 And the chief of the house of the father of the Gershonites shall
be Eliasaph the son of Lael. 3:25 And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tabernacle of the
congregation shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering
thereof, and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, 3:26 And the hangings of the court, and the curtain for
the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar
round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof. 3:27 And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of
the Izeharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of
the Uzzielites: these are the families of the Kohathites. 3:28 In the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were
eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary. 3:29 The families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the
tabernacle southward. 3:30 And the chief of the house of the father of the families of the
Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel. 3:31 And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the
candlestick, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary
wherewith they minister, and the hanging, and all the service thereof. 3:32 And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be chief over the
chief of the Levites, and have the oversight of them that keep the
charge of the sanctuary. 3:33 Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the
Mushites: these are the families of Merari. 3:34 And those that were numbered of them, according to the number of
all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two
hundred. 3:35 And the chief of the house of the father of the families of
Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail: these shall pitch on the side of
the tabernacle northward. 3:36 And under the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shall be
the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars
thereof, and the sockets thereof, and all the vessels thereof, and all
that serveth thereto, 3:37 And the pillars of the court round about,
and their sockets, and their pins, and their cords. 3:38 But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward the east, even
before the tabernacle of the congregation eastward, shall be Moses,
and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the
charge of the children of Israel; and the stranger that cometh nigh
shall be put to death. 3:39 All that were numbered of the Levites, which Moses and Aaron
numbered at the commandment of the LORD, throughout their families,
all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty and two
thousand. 3:40 And the LORD said unto Moses, Number all the firstborn of the
males of the children of Israel from a month old and upward, and take
the number of their names. 3:41 And thou shalt take the Levites for me (I am the LORD) instead of
all the firstborn among the children of Israel; and the cattle of the
Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the children
of Israel. 3:42 And Moses numbered, as the LORD commanded him, all the firstborn
among the children of Israel. 3:43 And all the firstborn males by the number of names, from a month
old and upward, of those that were numbered of them, were twenty and
two thousand two hundred and threescore and thirteen. 3:44 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 3:45 Take the Levites
instead of all the firstborn among the children of Israel, and the
cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle; and the Levites shall
be mine: I am the LORD. 3:46 And for those that are to be redeemed of the two hundred and
threescore and thirteen of the firstborn of the children of Israel,
which are more than the Levites; 3:47 Thou shalt even take five
shekels apiece by the poll, after the shekel of the sanctuary shalt
thou take them: (the shekel is twenty gerahs:) 3:48 And thou shalt
give the money, wherewith the odd number of them is to be redeemed,
unto Aaron and to his sons. 3:49 And Moses took the redemption money of them that were over and
above them that were redeemed by the Levites: 3:50 Of the firstborn of
the children of Israel took he the money; a thousand three hundred and
threescore and five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary: 3:51
And Moses gave the money of them that were redeemed unto Aaron and to
his sons, according to the word of the LORD, as the LORD commanded
Moses. 4:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron, saying, 4:2 Take the
sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, after their
families, by the house of their fathers, 4:3 From thirty years old and
upward even until fifty years old, all that enter into the host, to do
the work in the tabernacle of the congregation. 4:4 This shall be the service of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle
of the congregation, about the most holy things: 4:5 And when the camp
setteth forward, Aaron shall come, and his sons, and they shall take
down the covering vail, and cover the ark of testimony with it: 4:6
And shall put thereon the covering of badgers' skins, and shall spread
over it a cloth wholly of blue, and shall put in the staves thereof. 4:7 And upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue,
and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and covers
to cover withal: and the continual bread shall be thereon: 4:8 And
they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same
with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put in the staves
thereof. 4:9 And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of
the light, and his lamps, and his tongs, and his snuffdishes, and all
the oil vessels thereof, wherewith they minister unto it: 4:10 And
they shall put it and all the vessels thereof within a covering of
badgers' skins, and shall put it upon a bar. 4:11 And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and
cover it with a covering of badgers' skins, and shall put to the
staves thereof: 4:12 And they shall take all the instruments of
ministry, wherewith they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a
cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of badgers' skins, and
shall put them on a bar: 4:13 And they shall take away the ashes from
the altar, and spread a purple cloth thereon: 4:14 And they shall put
upon it all the vessels thereof, wherewith they minister about it,
even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basons, all
the vessels of the altar; and they shall spread upon it a covering of
badgers' skins, and put to the staves of it. 4:15 And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the
sanctuary, and all the vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set
forward; after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it: but
they shall not touch any holy thing, lest they die. These things are
the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tabernacle of the
congregation. 4:16 And to the office of Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest
pertaineth the oil for the light, and the sweet incense, and the daily
meat offering, and the anointing oil, and the oversight of all the
tabernacle, and of all that therein is, in the sanctuary, and in the
vessels thereof. 4:17 And the LORD spake unto Moses and unto Aaron saying, 4:18 Cut ye
not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the
Levites: 4:19 But thus do unto them, that they may live, and not die,
when they approach unto the most holy things: Aaron and his sons shall
go in, and appoint them every one to his service and to his burden:
4:20 But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered,
lest they die. 4:21 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 4:22 Take also the sum of
the sons of Gershon, throughout the houses of their fathers, by their
families; 4:23 From thirty years old and upward until fifty years old
shalt thou number them; all that enter in to perform the service, to
do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation. 4:24 This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve,
and for burdens: 4:25 And they shall bear the curtains of the
tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation, his covering, and
the covering of the badgers' skins that is above upon it, and the
hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, 4:26 And
the hangings of the court, and the hanging for the door of the gate of
the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about,
and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and all
that is made for them: so shall they serve. 4:27 At the appointment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service
of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burdens, and in all their
service: and ye shall appoint unto them in charge all their burdens. 4:28 This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon in the
tabernacle of the congregation: and their charge shall be under the
hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. 4:29 As for the sons of Merari, thou shalt number them after their
families, by the house of their fathers; 4:30 From thirty years old
and upward even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them, every one
that entereth into the service, to do the work of the tabernacle of
the congregation. 4:31 And this is the charge of their burden, according to all their
service in the tabernacle of the congregation; the boards of the
tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars thereof, and sockets
thereof, 4:32 And the pillars of the court round about, and their
sockets, and their pins, and their cords, with all their instruments,
and with all their service: and by name ye shall reckon the
instruments of the charge of their burden. 4:33 This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari,
according to all their service, in the tabernacle of the congregation,
under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. 4:34 And Moses and Aaron and the chief of the congregation numbered
the sons of the Kohathites after their families, and after the house
of their fathers, 4:35 From thirty years old and upward even unto
fifty years old, every one that entereth into the service, for the
work in the tabernacle of the congregation: 4:36 And those that were
numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and
fifty.