Without my Lord, guarded to know your
pleasure

   King. Bring him before vs

   Rosin. Hoa, Guildensterne? Bring in my Lord. Enter Hamlet and Guildensterne. King. Now Hamlet, where's Polonius? Ham. At Supper

   King. At Supper? Where? Ham. Not where he eats, but where he is eaten, a certaine
conuocation of wormes are e'ne at him. Your worm
is your onely Emperor for diet. We fat all creatures else
to fat vs, and we fat our selfe for Magots. Your fat King,
and your leane Begger is but variable seruice to dishes,
but to one Table that's the end

   King. What dost thou meane by this? Ham. Nothing but to shew you how a King may go
a Progresse through the guts of a Begger

   King. Where is Polonius

   Ham. In heauen, send thither to see. If your Messenger
finde him not there, seeke him i'th other place your
selfe: but indeed, if you finde him not this moneth, you
shall nose him as you go vp the staires into the Lobby

   King. Go seeke him there

   Ham. He will stay till ye come

   K. Hamlet, this deed of thine, for thine especial safety
Which we do tender, as we deerely greeue
For that which thou hast done, must send thee hence
With fierie Quicknesse. Therefore prepare thy selfe,
The Barke is readie, and the winde at helpe,
Th' Associates tend, and euery thing at bent
For England

   Ham. For England? King. I Hamlet

   Ham. Good

   King. So is it, if thou knew'st our purposes

   Ham. I see a Cherube that see's him: but come, for
England. Farewell deere Mother

   King. Thy louing Father Hamlet

   Hamlet. My Mother: Father and Mother is man and
wife: man & wife is one flesh, and so my mother. Come,
for England. Exit

  King. Follow him at foote,
Tempt him with speed aboord:
Delay it not, Ile haue him hence to night. Away, for euery thing is Seal'd and done
That else leanes on th' Affaire, pray you make hast. And England, if my loue thou holdst at ought,
As my great power thereof may giue thee sense,
Since yet thy Cicatrice lookes raw and red
After the Danish Sword, and thy free awe
Payes homage to vs; thou maist not coldly set
Our Soueraigne Processe, which imports at full
By Letters coniuring to that effect
The present death of Hamlet. Do it England,
For like the Hecticke in my blood he rages,
And thou must cure me: Till I know 'tis done,
How ere my happes, my ioyes were ne're begun. Exit

Enter Fortinbras with an Armie. For. Go Captaine, from me greet the Danish King,
Tell him that by his license, Fortinbras
Claimes the conueyance of a promis'd March
Ouer his Kingdome. You know the Rendeuous:
If that his Maiesty would ought with vs,
We shall expresse our dutie in his eye,
And let him know so

   Cap. I will doo't, my Lord

   For. Go safely on. Enter. Enter Queene and Horatio. Qu. I will not speake with her

   Hor. She is importunate, indeed distract, her moode
will needs be pittied

   Qu. What would she haue? Hor. She speakes much of her Father; saies she heares
There's trickes i'th' world, and hems, and beats her heart,
Spurnes enuiously at Strawes, speakes things in doubt,
That carry but halfe sense: Her speech is nothing,
Yet the vnshaped vse of it doth moue
The hearers to Collection; they ayme at it,
And botch the words vp fit to their owne thoughts,
Which as her winkes, and nods, and gestures yeeld them,
Indeed would make one thinke there would be thought,
Though nothing sure, yet much vnhappily

   Qu. 'Twere good she were spoken with,
For she may strew dangerous coniectures
In ill breeding minds. Let her come in. To my sicke soule (as sinnes true Nature is)
Each toy seemes Prologue, to some great amisse,
So full of Artlesse iealousie is guilt,
It spill's it selfe, in fearing to be spilt. Enter Ophelia distracted. Ophe. Where is the beauteous Maiesty of Denmark

   Qu. How now Ophelia? Ophe. How should I your true loue know from another one? By his Cockle hat and staffe, and his Sandal shoone

   Qu. Alas sweet Lady: what imports this Song? Ophe. Say you? Nay pray you marke. He is dead and gone Lady, he is dead and gone,
At his head a grasse-greene Turfe, at his heeles a stone. Enter King. Qu. Nay but Ophelia

   Ophe. Pray you marke. White his Shrow'd as the Mountaine Snow

   Qu. Alas, looke heere my Lord

   Ophe. Larded with sweet Flowers:
Which bewept to the graue did not go,
With true-loue showres

   King. How do ye, pretty Lady? Ophe. Well, God dil'd you. They say the Owle was
a Bakers daughter. Lord, wee know what we are, but
know not what we may be. God be at your Table

   King. Conceit vpon her Father

   Ophe. Pray you let's haue no words of this: but when
they aske you what it meanes, say you this:
To morrow is S[aint]. Valentines day, all in the morning betime,
And I a Maid at your Window, to be your Valentine. Then vp he rose, & don'd his clothes, & dupt the chamber dore,
Let in the Maid, that out a Maid, neuer departed more

   King. Pretty Ophelia

   Ophe. Indeed la? without an oath Ile make an end ont. By gis, and by S[aint]. Charity,
Alacke, and fie for shame:
Yong men wil doo't, if they come too't,
By Cocke they are too blame. Quoth she before you tumbled me,
You promis'd me to Wed:
So would I ha done by yonder Sunne,
And thou hadst not come to my bed

   King. How long hath she bin thus? Ophe. I hope all will be well. We must bee patient,
but I cannot choose but weepe, to thinke they should
lay him i'th' cold ground: My brother shall knowe of it,
and so I thanke you for your good counsell. Come, my
Coach: Goodnight Ladies: Goodnight sweet Ladies:
Goodnight, goodnight. Enter. King. Follow her close,
Giue her good watch I pray you:
Oh this is the poyson of deepe greefe, it springs
All from her Fathers death.