"Don't
keep these Master Sweepstakes waiting. Decide--do you choose to go with
them or with us?" "Sir--uncle--sir, you know, since all the UNIFORMS agreed to go together-
-"

"Off with you, then, Mr. Uniform, if you mean to go," said Mr. Gresham. Hal ran downstairs in such a hurry that he forgot his bow and arrows. Ben discovered this when he went to fetch his own; and the lad from
Bristol, who had been ordered by Mr. Gresham to eat his breakfast before
he proceeded to Redland Chapel, heard Ben talking about his cousin's bow
and arrows. "I know," said Ben, "he will be sorry not to have his bow
with him, because here are the green knots tied to it, to match his
cockade:  and he said that the boys were all to carry their bows, as part
of the show." "If you'll give me leave, sir," said the poor Bristol lad, "I shall have
plenty of time; and I'll run down to the Well Walk after the young
gentleman, and take him his bow and arrows." "Will you? I shall be much obliged to you," said Ben; and away went the
boy with the bow that was ornamented with green ribands. The public walk leading to the Wells was full of company. The windows of
all the houses in St. Vincent's Parade were crowded with well dressed
ladies, who were looking out in expectation of the archery procession. Parties of gentlemen and ladies, and a motley crowd of spectators, were
seen moving backwards and forwards, under the rocks, on the opposite side
of the water. A barge, with coloured streamers flying, was waiting to
take up a party who were going upon the water. The bargemen rested upon
their oars, and gazed with broad faces of curiosity upon the busy scene
that appeared upon the public walk. The archers and archeresses were now drawn up on the flags under the
semicircular piazza just before Mrs. Yearsley's library. A little band
of children, who had been mustered by Lady Diana Sweepstakes' SPIRITED
EXERTIONS, closed the procession. They were now all in readiness. The
drummer only waited for her ladyship's signal; and the archers' corps
only waited for her ladyship's word of command to march. "Where are your bow and arrows, my little man?" said her ladyship to Hal,
as she reviewed her Lilliputian regiment. "You can't march, man, without
your arms?" Hal had despatched a messenger for his forgotten bow, but the messenger
returned not. He looked from side to side in great distress--"Oh,
there's my bow coming, I declare!" cried he; "look, I see the bow and the
ribands. Look now, between the trees, Charles Sweepstakes, on the
Hotwell Walk; it is coming!" "But you've kept us all waiting a confounded time," said his impatient
friend. "It is that good-natured poor fellow from Bristol, I protest, that has
brought it me; I'm sure I don't deserve it from him," said Hal, to
himself, when he saw the lad with the black patch on his eye running,
quite out of breath, towards him, with his bow and arrows. "Fall back, my good friend--fall back," said the military lady, as soon
as he had delivered the bow to Hal; "I mean, stand out of the way, for
your great patch cuts no figure amongst us. Don't follow so close, now,
as if you belonged to us, pray." The poor boy had no ambition to partake the triumph; he FELL BACK as soon
as he understood the meaning of the lady's words. The drum beat, the
fife played, the archers marched, the spectators admired. Hal stepped
proudly, and felt as if the eyes of the whole universe were upon his
epaulettes, or upon the facings of his uniform; whilst all the time he
was considered only as part of a show. The walk appeared much shorter than usual, and he was extremely sorry
that Lady Diana, when they were half-way up the hill leading to Prince's
Place, mounted her horse, because the road was dirty, and all the
gentlemen and ladies who accompanied her followed her example. "We can leave the children to walk, you know," said she to the gentleman
who helped her to mount her horse. "I must call to some of them, though,
and leave orders where they are to join." She beckoned:  and Hal, who was foremost, and proud to show his alacrity,
ran on to receive her ladyship's orders. Now, as we have before
observed, it was a sharp and windy day; and though Lady Diana Sweepstakes
was actually speaking to him, and looking at him, he could not prevent
his nose from wanting to be blowed:  he pulled out his handkerchief and
out rolled the new ball which had been given to him just before he left
home, and which, according to his usual careless habits, he had stuffed
into his pockets in his hurry. "Oh, my new ball!" cried he, as he ran
after it. As he stopped to pick it up, he let go his hat, which he had
hitherto held on with anxious care; for the hat, though it had a fine
green and white cockade, had no band or string round it. The string, as
we may recollect, our wasteful hero had used in spinning his top. The
hat was too large for his head without this band; a sudden gust of wind
blew it off. Lady Diana's horse started and reared. She was a FAMOUS
horse woman, and sat him to the admiration of all beholders; but there
was a puddle of red clay and water in this spot, and her ladyship's
uniform habit was a sufferer by the accident. "Careless brat!" said she,
"why can't he keep his hat upon his head?" In the meantime, the wind
blew the hat down the hill, and Hal ran after it amidst the laughter of
his kind friends, the young Sweepstakes, and the rest of the little
regiment. The hat was lodged, at length, upon a bank. Hal pursued it:
he thought this bank was hard, but, alas! the moment he set his foot upon
it the foot sank. He tried to draw it back; his other foot slipped, and
he fell prostrate, in his green and white uniform, into the treacherous
bed of red mud. His companions, who had halted upon the top of the hill,
stood laughing, spectators of his misfortune. It happened that the poor boy with the black patch upon his eye, who had
been ordered by Lady Diana to "fall back" and to "keep at a distance,"
was now coming up the hill; and the moment he saw our fallen hero, he
hastened to his assistance. He dragged poor Hal, who was a deplorable
spectacle, out of the red mud. The obliging mistress of a lodging house,
as soon as she understood that the young gentleman was nephew to Mr.
Gresham, to whom she had formerly let her house, received Hal, covered as
he was with dirt. The poor Bristol lad hastened to Mr. Gresham's for clean stockings and
shoes for Hal. He was unwilling to give up his uniform:  it was rubbed
and rubbed, and a spot here and there was washed out; and he kept
continually repeating,--"When it's dry it will all brush off--when it's
dry it will all brush off, won't it?" But soon the fear of being too
late at the archery meeting began to balance the dread of appearing in
his stained habiliments; and he now as anxiously repeated, whilst the
woman held the wet coat to the fire, "Oh, I shall be too late; indeed, I
shall be too late; make haste; it will never dry; hold it nearer--nearer
to the fire. I shall lose my turn to shoot; oh, give me the coat; I
don't mind how it is, if I can but get it on." Holding it nearer and nearer to the fire dried it quickly, to be sure;
but it shrunk it also, so that it was no easy matter to get the coat on
again. However, Hal, who did not see the red splashes, which, in spite
of all these operations, were too visible upon his shoulders, and upon
the skirts of his white coat behind, was pretty well satisfied to observe
that there was not one spot upon the facings. "Nobody," said he, "will
take notice of my coat behind, I daresay. I think it looks as smart
almost as ever!" --and under this persuasion our young archer resumed his
bow--his bow with green ribands, now no more!--and he pursued his way to
the Downs. All his companions were far out of sight. "I suppose," said he to his
friend with the black patch--"I suppose my uncle and Ben had left home
before you went for the shoes and stockings for me?" "Oh, yes, sir; the butler said they had been gone to the Downs a matter
of a good half-hour or more." Hal trudged on as fast as he possibly could. When he got upon the Downs,
he saw numbers of carriages, and crowds of people, all going towards the
place of meeting at the Ostrich. He pressed forwards. He was at first
so much afraid of being late, that he did not take notice of the mirth
his motley appearance excited in all beholders. At length he reached the
appointed spot. There was a great crowd of people. In the midst he
heard Lady Diana's loud voice betting upon someone who was just going to
shoot at the mark. "So then the shooting is begun, is it?" said Hal. "Oh, let me in! pray
let me into the circle! I'm one of the archers--I am, indeed; don't you
see my green and white uniform?" "Your red and white uniform, you mean," said the man to whom he addressed
himself; and the people, as they opened a passage for him, could not
refrain laughing at the mixture of dirt and finery which it exhibited. In vain, when he got into the midst of the formidable circle, he looked
to his friends, the young Sweepstakes, for their countenance and support. They were amongst the most unmerciful of the laughers. Lady Diana also
seemed more to enjoy than to pity his confusion. "Why could you not keep your hat upon your head, man?" said she, in her
masculine tone. "You have been almost the ruin of my poor uniform habit;
but I've escaped rather better than you have. Don't stand there, in the
middle of the circle, or you'll have an arrow in your eyes just now, I've
a notion." Hal looked round in search of better friends. "Oh, where's my uncle?--
where's Ben?" said he. He was in such confusion, that, amongst the
number of faces, he could scarcely distinguish one from another; but he
felt somebody at this moment pull his elbow, and, to his great relief, he
heard the friendly voice, and saw the good natured face of his Cousin
Ben. "Come back; come behind these people," said Ben, "and put on my great-
coat; here it is for you." Right glad was Hal to cover his disgraced uniform with the rough great-
coat which he had formerly despised. He pulled the stained, drooping
cockade out of his unfortunate hat; and he was now sufficiently recovered
from his vexation to give an intelligible account of his accident to his
uncle and Patty, who anxiously inquired what had detained him so long,
and what had been the matter. In the midst of the history of his
disaster, he was just proving to Patty that his taking the hatband to
spin his top had nothing to do with his misfortune, and he was at the
same time endeavouring to refute his uncle's opinion that the waste of
the whipcord that tied the parcel was the original cause of all his
evils, when he was summoned to try his skill with his FAMOUS bow. "My hands are benumbed; I can scarcely feel," said he, rubbing them, and
blowing upon the ends of his fingers. "Come, come," cried young Sweepstakes, "I'm within one inch of the mark;
who'll go nearer? I shall like to see. Shoot away, Hal; but first
understand our laws; we settled them before you came upon the green.