Because I will not and must not see him--
because it would be against all rules of dignity and honour to see him. Before I am triumphantly cleared before a court, there is
another arbitration this gentleman owes me as a gentleman,
and in referring him to my seconds I am strictly--"

     Armagnac and Brun were waving their hats wildly, and even
the Doctor's enemies roared applause at this unexpected defiance. Once more a few sentences were inaudible, but they could hear him say:
"To my friends--I myself should always prefer weapons purely intellectual,
and to these an evolved humanity will certainly confine itself. But our own most precious truth is the fundamental force of matter
and heredity. My books are successful; my theories are unrefuted;
but I suffer in politics from a prejudice almost physical in the French. I cannot speak like Clemenceau and Deroulede, for their words are like
echoes of their pistols. The French ask for a duellist as the English
ask for a sportsman. Well, I give my proofs:  I will pay
this barbaric bribe, and then go back to reason for the rest of my life." Two men were instantly found in the crowd itself to offer
their services to Colonel Dubosc, who came out presently, satisfied. One was the common soldier with the coffee, who said simply:
"I will act for you, sir. I am the Duc de Valognes." The other was
the big man, whom his friend the priest sought at first to dissuade;
and then walked away alone. In the early evening a light dinner was spread at the back of
the Cafe Charlemagne. Though unroofed by any glass or gilt plaster,
the guests were nearly all under a delicate and irregular roof of leaves;
for the ornamental trees stood so thick around and among the tables
as to give something of the dimness and the dazzle of a small orchard. At one of the central tables a very stumpy little priest sat
in complete solitude, and applied himself to a pile of whitebait
with the gravest sort of enjoyment. His daily living being very plain,
he had a peculiar taste for sudden and isolated luxuries; he was
an abstemious epicure. He did not lift his eyes from his plate,
round which red pepper, lemons, brown bread and butter, etc.,
were rigidly ranked, until a tall shadow fell across the table,
and his friend Flambeau sat down opposite. Flambeau was gloomy. "I'm afraid I must chuck this business," said he heavily. "I'm all on the side of the French soldiers like Dubosc,
and I'm all against the French atheists like Hirsch; but it seems to me
in this case we've made a mistake. The Duke and I thought it as well
to investigate the charge, and I must say I'm glad we did." "Is the paper a forgery, then?" asked the priest

     "That's just the odd thing," replied Flambeau. "It's exactly like
Hirsch's writing, and nobody can point out any mistake in it. But it wasn't written by Hirsch. If he's a French patriot
he didn't write it, because it gives information to Germany. And if he's a German spy he didn't write it, well--because it doesn't
give information to Germany." "You mean the information is wrong?" asked Father Brown. "Wrong," replied the other, "and wrong exactly where Dr Hirsch
would have been right--about the hiding-place of his own secret formula
in his own official department. By favour of Hirsch and the authorities,
the Duke and I have actually been allowed to inspect the secret drawer
at the War Office where the Hirsch formula is kept. We are the only people
who have ever known it, except the inventor himself and the Minister
for War; but the Minister permitted it to save Hirsch from fighting. After that we really can't support Dubosc if his revelation
is a mare's nest." "And it is?" asked Father Brown. "It is," said his friend gloomily. "It is a clumsy forgery
by somebody who knew nothing of the real hiding-place. It says the paper
is in the cupboard on the right of the Secretary's desk. As a fact
the cupboard with the secret drawer is some way to the left of the desk. It says the grey envelope contains a long document written in red ink. It isn't written in red ink, but in ordinary black ink. It's manifestly absurd to say that Hirsch can have made a mistake
about a paper that nobody knew of but himself; or can have tried
to help a foreign thief by telling him to fumble in the wrong drawer. I think we must chuck it up and apologize to old Carrots." Father Brown seemed to cogitate; he lifted a little whitebait
on his fork. "You are sure the grey envelope was in the left cupboard?" he asked. "Positive," replied Flambeau. "The grey envelope--
it was a white envelope really--was--"

     Father Brown put down the small silver fish and the fork and
stared across at his companion. "What?" he asked, in an altered voice. "Well, what?" repeated Flambeau, eating heartily. "It was not grey," said the priest. "Flambeau, you frighten me." "What the deuce are you frightened of?" "I'm frightened of a white envelope," said the other seriously,
"If it had only just been grey! Hang it all, it might as well
have been grey. But if it was white, the whole business is black. The Doctor has been dabbling in some of the old brimstone after all." "But I tell you he couldn't have written such a note!" cried Flambeau. "The note is utterly wrong about the facts. And innocent or guilty, Dr Hirsch knew all about the facts." "The man who wrote that note knew all about the facts,"
said his clerical companion soberly. "He could never have
got 'em so wrong without knowing about 'em. You have to know
an awful lot to be wrong on every subject--like the devil." "Do you mean--?" "I mean a man telling lies on chance would have told some of the truth,"
said his friend firmly. "Suppose someone sent you to find a house
with a green door and a blue blind, with a front garden but no back garden,
with a dog but no cat, and where they drank coffee but not tea. You would say if you found no such house that it was all made up. But I say no. I say if you found a house where the door was blue and
the blind green, where there was a back garden and no front garden,
where cats were common and dogs instantly shot, where tea was drunk
in quarts and coffee forbidden--then you would know you had
found the house. The man must have known that particular house
to be so accurately inaccurate." "But what could it mean?" demanded the diner opposite. "I can't conceive," said Brown; "I don't understand this Hirsch
affair at all. As long as it was only the left drawer instead of
the right, and red ink instead of black, I thought it must be the
chance blunders of a forger, as you say. But three is a mystical number;
it finishes things. It finishes this. That the direction about
the drawer, the colour of ink, the colour of envelope, should none of
them be right by accident, that can't be a coincidence. It wasn't." "What was it, then? Treason?" asked Flambeau, resuming his dinner. "I don't know that either," answered Brown, with a face
of blank bewilderment. "The only thing I can think of....
Well, I never understood that Dreyfus case. I can always grasp
moral evidence easier than the other sorts. I go by a man's eyes and voice,
don't you know, and whether his family seems happy, and by what
subjects he chooses--and avoids. Well, I was puzzled in the Dreyfus case. Not by the horrible things imputed both ways; I know (though it's not
modern to say so) that human nature in the highest places is still capable
of being Cenci or Borgia. No--, what puzzled me was the sincerity
of both parties. I don't mean the political parties; the rank and file
are always roughly honest, and often duped. I mean the persons
of the play. I mean the conspirators, if they were conspirators. I mean the traitor, if he was a traitor. I mean the men who must have
known the truth. Now Dreyfus went on like a man who knew he was
a wronged man. And yet the French statesmen and soldiers went on
as if they knew he wasn't a wronged man but simply a wrong 'un. I don't mean they behaved well; I mean they behaved as if they were sure. I can't describe these things; I know what I mean."