I will receiue it with all diligence of spirit; put
your Bonet to his right vse, 'tis for the head

   Osr. I thanke your Lordship, 'tis very hot

   Ham. No, beleeue mee 'tis very cold, the winde is
Northerly

   Osr. It is indifferent cold my Lord indeed

   Ham. Mee thinkes it is very soultry, and hot for my
Complexion

   Osr. Exceedingly, my Lord, it is very soultry, as 'twere
I cannot tell how: but my Lord, his Maiesty bad me signifie
to you, that he ha's laid a great wager on your head:
Sir, this is the matter

   Ham. I beseech you remember

   Osr. Nay, in good faith, for mine ease in good faith:
Sir, you are not ignorant of what excellence Laertes is at
his weapon

   Ham. What's his weapon? Osr. Rapier and dagger

   Ham. That's two of his weapons; but well

   Osr. The sir King ha's wag'd with him six Barbary horses,
against the which he impon'd as I take it, sixe French
Rapiers and Poniards, with their assignes, as Girdle,
Hangers or so: three of the Carriages infaith are very
deare to fancy, very responsiue to the hilts, most delicate
carriages, and of very liberall conceit

   Ham. What call you the Carriages? Osr. The Carriages Sir, are the hangers

   Ham. The phrase would bee more Germaine to the
matter: If we could carry Cannon by our sides; I would
it might be Hangers till then; but on sixe Barbary Horses
against sixe French Swords: their Assignes, and three
liberall conceited Carriages, that's the French but against
the Danish; why is this impon'd as you call it? Osr. The King Sir, hath laid that in a dozen passes betweene
you and him, hee shall not exceed you three hits;
He hath one twelue for mine, and that would come to
imediate tryall, if your Lordship would vouchsafe the
Answere

   Ham. How if I answere no? Osr. I meane my Lord, the opposition of your person
in tryall

   Ham. Sir, I will walke heere in the Hall; if it please
his Maiestie, 'tis the breathing time of day with me; let
the Foyles bee brought, the Gentleman willing, and the
King hold his purpose; I will win for him if I can: if
not, Ile gaine nothing but my shame, and the odde hits

   Osr. Shall I redeliuer you ee'n so? Ham. To this effect Sir, after what flourish your nature
will

   Osr. I commend my duty to your Lordship

   Ham. Yours, yours; hee does well to commend it
himselfe, there are no tongues else for's tongue

   Hor. This Lapwing runs away with the shell on his
head

   Ham. He did Complie with his Dugge before hee
suck't it: thus had he and mine more of the same Beauty
that I know the drossie age dotes on; only got the tune of
the time, and outward habite of encounter, a kinde of
yesty collection, which carries them through & through
the most fond and winnowed opinions; and doe but blow
them to their tryalls: the Bubbles are out

   Hor. You will lose this wager, my Lord

   Ham. I doe not thinke so, since he went into France,
I haue beene in continuall practice; I shall winne at the
oddes: but thou wouldest not thinke how all heere about
my heart: but it is no matter

   Hor. Nay, good my Lord

   Ham. It is but foolery; but it is such a kinde of
gain-giuing as would perhaps trouble a woman

   Hor. If your minde dislike any thing, obey. I will forestall
their repaire hither, and say you are not fit

   Ham. Not a whit, we defie Augury; there's a speciall
Prouidence in the fall of a sparrow. If it be now, 'tis not
to come: if it bee not to come, it will bee now: if it
be not now; yet it will come; the readinesse is all, since no
man ha's ought of what he leaues. What is't to leaue betimes? Enter King, Queene, Laertes and Lords, with other Attendants with
Foyles,
and Gauntlets, a Table and Flagons of Wine on it. Kin. Come Hamlet, come, and take this hand from me

   Ham. Giue me your pardon Sir, I'ue done you wrong,
But pardon't as you are a Gentleman. This presence knowes,
And you must needs haue heard how I am punisht
With sore distraction? What I haue done
That might your nature honour, and exception
Roughly awake, I heere proclaime was madnesse:
Was't Hamlet wrong'd Laertes? Neuer Hamlet. If Hamlet from himselfe be tane away:
And when he's not himselfe, do's wrong Laertes,
Then Hamlet does it not, Hamlet denies it:
Who does it then? His Madnesse? If't be so,
Hamlet is of the Faction that is wrong'd,
His madnesse is poore Hamlets Enemy. Sir, in this Audience,
Let my disclaiming from a purpos'd euill,
Free me so farre in your most generous thoughts,
That I haue shot mine Arrow o're the house,
And hurt my Mother

   Laer. I am satisfied in Nature,
Whose motiue in this case should stirre me most
To my Reuenge. But in my termes of Honor
I stand aloofe, and will no reconcilement,
Till by some elder Masters of knowne Honor,
I haue a voyce, and president of peace
To keepe my name vngorg'd. But till that time,
I do receiue your offer'd loue like loue,
And wil not wrong it

   Ham. I do embrace it freely,
And will this Brothers wager frankely play. Giue vs the Foyles: Come on

   Laer. Come one for me

   Ham. Ile be your foile Laertes, in mine ignorance,
Your Skill shall like a Starre i'th' darkest night,
Sticke fiery off indeede

   Laer. You mocke me Sir

   Ham. No by this hand

   King. Giue them the Foyles yong Osricke,
Cousen Hamlet, you know the wager

   Ham. Verie well my Lord,
Your Grace hath laide the oddes a'th' weaker side

   King. I do not feare it,
I haue seene you both:
But since he is better'd, we haue therefore oddes

   Laer. This is too heauy,
Let me see another

   Ham. This likes me well,
These Foyles haue all a length. Prepare to play. Osricke. I my good Lord

   King. Set me the Stopes of wine vpon that Table:
If Hamlet giue the first, or second hit,
Or quit in answer of the third exchange,
Let all the Battlements their Ordinance fire,
The King shal drinke to Hamlets better breath,
And in the Cup an vnion shal he throw
Richer then that, which foure successiue Kings
In Denmarkes Crowne haue worne. Giue me the Cups,
And let the Kettle to the Trumpets speake,
The Trumpet to the Cannoneer without,
The Cannons to the Heauens, the Heauen to Earth,
Now the King drinkes to Hamlet. Come, begin,
And you the Iudges beare a wary eye

   Ham. Come on sir

   Laer. Come on sir. They play. Ham. One

   Laer. No

   Ham. Iudgement

   Osr. A hit, a very palpable hit

   Laer. Well: againe

   King. Stay, giue me drinke. Hamlet, this Pearle is thine,
Here's to thy health. Giue him the cup,

Trumpets sound, and shot goes off. Ham. Ile play this bout first, set by a-while. Come: Another hit; what say you? Laer. A touch, a touch, I do confesse

   King. Our Sonne shall win

   Qu. He's fat, and scant of breath. Heere's a Napkin, rub thy browes,
The Queene Carowses to thy fortune, Hamlet

   Ham. Good Madam

   King. Gertrude, do not drinke

   Qu. I will my Lord;
I pray you pardon me

   King. It is the poyson'd Cup, it is too late

   Ham. I dare not drinke yet Madam,
By and by

   Qu. Come, let me wipe thy face

   Laer. My Lord, Ile hit him now

   King. I do not thinke't

   Laer. And yet 'tis almost 'gainst my conscience

   Ham. Come for the third.