Pulled down it was, in the old squire's time, and----"

"I mean," explained MacIan elaborately, "that you think that
there should be someone typifying religion, a priest----"

"Priests!" said the old man with sudden passion. "Priests! I
know 'un. What they want in England? That's what I say. What
they want in England?" "They want you," said MacIan. "Quite so," said Turnbull, "and me; but they won't get us. MacIan, your attempt on the primitive innocence does not seem
very successful. Let me try. What you want, my friend, is your
rights. You don't want any priests or churches. A vote, a right
to speak is what you----"

"Who says I a'n't got a right to speak?" said the old man, facing
round in an irrational frenzy. "I got a right to speak. I'm a
man, I am. I don't want no votin' nor priests. I say a man's a
man; that's what I say. If a man a'n't a man, what is he? That's
what I say, if a man a'n't a man, what is he? When I sees a man,
I sez 'e's a man." "Quite so," said Turnbull, "a citizen." "I say he's a man," said the rustic furiously, stopping and
striking his stick on the ground. "Not a city or owt else. He's a
man." "You're perfectly right," said the sudden voice of MacIan,
falling like a sword. "And you have kept close to something the
whole world of today tries to forget." "Good night." And the old man went on wildly singing into the night. "A jolly old creature," said Turnbull; "he didn't seem able to
get much beyond that fact that a man is a man." "Has anybody got beyond it?" asked MacIan. Turnbull looked at him curiously. "Are you turning an agnostic?" he asked. "Oh, you do not understand!" cried out MacIan. "We Catholics are
all agnostics. We Catholics have only in that sense got as far as
realizing that man is a man. But your Ibsens and your Zolas and
your Shaws and your Tolstoys have not even got so far." VIII. AN INTERLUDE OF ARGUMENT

Morning broke in bitter silver along the grey and level plain;
and almost as it did so Turnbull and MacIan came out of a low,
scrubby wood on to the empty and desolate flats. They had walked
all night. They had walked all night and talked all night also, and if the
subject had been capable of being exhausted they would have
exhausted it. Their long and changing argument had taken them
through districts and landscapes equally changing. They had
discussed Haeckel upon hills so high and steep that in spite of
the coldness of the night it seemed as if the stars might burn
them. They had explained and re-explained the Massacre of St.
Bartholomew in little white lanes walled in with standing corn as
with walls of gold. They had talked about Mr. Kensit in dim and
twinkling pine woods, amid the bewildering monotony of the pines. And it was with the end of a long speech from MacIan,
passionately defending the practical achievements and the solid
prosperity of the Catholic tradition, that they came out upon the
open land. MacIan had learnt much and thought more since he came out of the
cloudy hills of Arisaig. He had met many typical modern figures
under circumstances which were sharply symbolic; and, moreover,
he had absorbed the main modern atmosphere from the mere presence
and chance phrases of Turnbull, as such atmospheres can always be
absorbed from the presence and the phrases of any man of great
mental vitality. He had at last begun thoroughly to understand
what are the grounds upon which the mass of the modern world
solidly disapprove of her creed; and he threw himself into
replying to them with a hot intellectual enjoyment. "I begin to understand one or two of your dogmas, Mr. Turnbull,"
he had said emphatically as they ploughed heavily up a wooded
hill. "And every one that I understand I deny. Take any one of
them you like. You hold that your heretics and sceptics have
helped the world forward and handed on a lamp of progress. I deny
it. Nothing is plainer from real history than that each of your
heretics invented a complete cosmos of his own which the next
heretic smashed entirely to pieces. Who knows now exactly what
Nestorius taught? Who cares? There are only two things that we
know for certain about it. The first is that Nestorius, as a
heretic, taught something quite opposite to the teaching of
Arius, the heretic who came before him, and something quite
useless to James Turnbull, the heretic who comes after. I defy
you to go back to the Free-thinkers of the past and find any
habitation for yourself at all. I defy you to read Godwin or
Shelley or the deists of the eighteenth century of the
nature-worshipping humanists of the Renaissance, without
discovering that you differ from them twice as much as you differ
from the Pope. You are a nineteenth-century sceptic, and you are
always telling me that I ignore the cruelty of nature. If you had
been an eighteenth-century sceptic you would have told me that I
ignore the kindness and benevolence of nature. You are an
atheist, and you praise the deists of the eighteenth century. Read them instead of praising them, and you will find that their
whole universe stands or falls with the deity. You are a
materialist, and you think Bruno a scientific hero. See what he
said and you will think him an insane mystic. No, the great
Free-thinker, with his genuine ability and honesty, does not in
practice destroy Christianity. What he does destroy is the
Free-thinker who went before. Free-thought may be suggestive, it
may be inspiriting, it may have as much as you please of the
merits that come from vivacity and variety. But there is one
thing Free-thought can never be by any possibility--Free-thought
can never be progressive. It can never be progressive because it
will accept nothing from the past; it begins every time again
from the beginning; and it goes every time in a different
direction. All the rational philosophers have gone along
different roads, so it is impossible to say which has gone
farthest. Who can discuss whether Emerson was a better optimist
than Schopenhauer was pessimist? It is like asking if this corn
is as yellow as that hill is steep. No; there are only two things
that really progress; and they both accept accumulations of
authority. They may be progressing uphill and down; they may be
growing steadily better or steadily worse; but they have steadily
increased in certain definable matters; they have steadily
advanced in a certain definable direction; they are the only two
things, it seems, that ever _can_ progress. The first is strictly
physical science. The second is the Catholic Church." "Physical science and the Catholic Church!" said Turnbull
sarcastically; "and no doubt the first owes a great deal to the
second." "If you pressed that point I might reply that it was very
probable," answered MacIan calmly. "I often fancy that your
historical generalizations rest frequently on random instances; I
should not be surprised if your vague notions of the Church as
the persecutor of science was a generalization from Galileo. I
should not be at all surprised if, when you counted the
scientific investigations and discoveries since the fall of Rome,
you found that a great mass of them had been made by monks. But
the matter is irrelevant to my meaning. I say that if you want an
example of anything which has progressed in the moral world by
the same method as science in the material world, by continually
adding to without unsettling what was there before, then I say
that there _is_ only one example of it. And that is Us." "With this enormous difference," said Turnbull, "that however
elaborate be the calculations of physical science, their net
result can be tested. Granted that it took millions of books I
never read and millions of men I never heard of to discover the
electric light. Still I can see the electric light. But I cannot
see the supreme virtue which is the result of all your theologies
and sacraments." "Catholic virtue is often invisible because it is the normal,"
answered MacIan. "Christianity is always out of fashion because
it is always sane; and all fashions are mild insanities. When
Italy is mad on art the Church seems too Puritanical; when
England is mad on Puritanism the Church seems too artistic. When
you quarrel with us now you class us with kingship and despotism;
but when you quarrelled with us first it was because we would not
accept the divine despotism of Henry VIII. The Church always
seems to be behind the times, when it is really beyond the times;
it is waiting till the last fad shall have seen its last summer.