This alarming whisper could not, however, have a permanent effect upon
Mrs. Montague's understanding, because three days afterwards Mrs.
Theresa, upon the most anxious inspection, entirely mistook the just and
natural proportions of the hip and shoulder. This danger vanishing, Mrs. Tattle presently, with a rueful length of
face, and formal preface, "hesitated to assure Mrs. Montague, that she
was greatly distressed about her daughter Sophy; that she was convinced
her lungs were affected; and that she certainly ought to drink the waters
morning and evening; and above all things, must keep one of the patirosa
lozenges constantly in her mouth, and directly consult Dr. Cardamum, the
best physician in the world, and the person she would send for herself
upon her death-bed; because, to her certain knowledge, he had recovered a
young lady, a relation of her own, after she had lost one whole GLOBE* of
her lungs." *Lobe. The medical opinion of a lady of so much anatomical precision could not
have much weight. Neither was this universal adviser more successful in
an attempt to introduce a tutor to Frederick, who, she apprehended, must
want some one to perfect him in the Latin and Greek, and dead languages,
of which, she observed, it would be impertinent for a woman to talk; only
she might venture to repeat what she had heard said by good authority,
that a competency of the dead tongues could be had nowhere but at a
public school, or else from a private tutor who had been abroad (after
the advantage of a classical education, finished in one of the
universities) with a good family; without which introduction it was idle
to think of reaping solid advantages from any continental tour; all which
requisites, from personal knowledge, she could aver to be concentrated in
the gentleman she had the honour to recommend, as having been tutor to a
young nobleman, who had now no further occasion for him, having,
unfortunately for himself and his family, been killed in an untimely
duel. All Mrs. Theresa Tattle's suggestions being lost upon these stoical
parents, her powers were next tried upon the children, and her success
soon became apparent. On Sophy, indeed, she could not make any
impression, though she had expended on her some of her finest strokes of
flattery. Sophy, though very desirous of the approbation of her friends,
was not very desirous of winning the favour of strangers. She was about
thirteen--that dangerous age at which ill educated girls, in their
anxiety to display their accomplishments, are apt to become dependent for
applause upon the praise of every idle visitor; when the habits not being
formed, and the attention being suddenly turned to dress and manners,
girls are apt to affect and imitate, indiscriminately, everything that
they conceive to be agreeable. Sophy, whose taste had been cultivated at the same time with her powers
of reasoning, was not liable to fall into these errors. She found that
she could please those whom she wished to please, without affecting to be
anything but what she really was; and her friends listened to what she
said, though she never repeated the sentiments, or adopted the phrases,
which she might easily have copied from the conversation of those who
were older or more fashionable than herself. This word FASHIONABLE, Mrs. Theresa Tattle knew, had usually a great
effect, even at thirteen; but she had not observed that it had much power
upon Sophy; nor were her remarks concerning grace and manners much
attended to. Her mother had taught Sophy that it was best to let herself
alone, and not to distort either her person or her mind in acquiring
grimace, which nothing but the fashion of the moment can support, and
which is always detected and despised by people of real good sense and
politeness. "Bless me!" said Mrs. Tattle, to herself, "if I had such a tall daughter,
and so unformed, before my eyes from morning to night, it would certainly
break my poor heart. Thank heaven, I am not a mother! if I were, Miss
Marianne for me!" Miss Marianne had heard so often from Mrs. Tattle that she was very
charming, that she could not help believing it; and from being a very
pleasing, unaffected little girl, she in a short time grew so conceited,
that she could neither speak, look, nor be silent without imagining that
everybody was, or ought to be, looking at her; and when Mrs. Theresa saw
that Mrs. Montague looked very grave upon these occasions, she, to repair
the ill she had done, would say, after praising Marianne's hair or her
eyes, "Oh, but little ladies should never think about their beauty, you
know. Nobody loves anybody for being handsome, but for being good." People must think children are very silly, or else they can never have
reflected upon the nature of belief in their own minds, if they imagine
that children will believe the words that are said to them, by way of
moral, when the countenance, manner, and every concomitant circumstance
tell them a different tale. Children are excellent physiognomists--they
quickly learn the universal language of looks; and what is said OF them
always makes a greater impression than what is said TO them, a truth of
which those prudent people surely cannot be aware who comfort themselves,
and apologize to parents, by saying, "Oh, but I would not say so and so
to the child." Mrs. Theresa had seldom said to Frederick Montague, "that he had a vast
deal of drollery, and was a most incomparable mimic;" but she had said so
of him in whispers, which magnified the sound to his imagination, if not
to his ear. He was a boy of much vivacity, and had considerable
abilities; but his appetite for vulgar praise had not yet been surfeited. Even Mrs. Theresa Tattle's flattery pleased him, and he exerted himself
for her entertainment so much that he became quite a buffoon. Instead of
observing characters and manners, that he might judge of them, and form
his own, he now watched every person he saw, that he might detect some
foible, or catch some singularity in their gesture or pronunciation,
which he might successfully mimic. Alarmed by the rapid progress of these evils, Mr. and Mrs. Montague, who,
from the first day that they had been honoured with Mrs. Tattle's visit,
had begun to look out for new lodgings, were now extremely impatient to
decamp. They were not people who, from the weak fear of offending a
silly acquaintance, would hazard the happiness of their family. They had
heard of a house in the country which was likely to suit them, and they
determined to go directly to look at it. As they were to be absent all
day, they foresaw that their officious neighbour would probably interfere
with their children. They did not choose to exact any promise from them
which they might be tempted to break, and therefore they only said at
parting, "If Mrs. Theresa Tattle should ask you to come to her, do as you
think proper." Scarcely had Mrs. Montague's carriage got out of hearing when a note was
brought, directed to "Frederick Montague, Junior, Esq.," which he
immediately opened, and read as follows:--

"Mrs. Theresa Tattle presents her very best compliments to the
entertaining Mr. Frederick Montague; she hopes he will have the charity
to drink tea with her this evening, and bring his charming sister, Miss
Marianne, with him, as Mrs. Theresa will be quite alone with a shocking
headache, and is sensible her nerves are affected; and Dr. Cardamum says
that (especially in Mrs. T. T.'s case) it is downright death to nervous
patients to be alone an instant. She therefore trusts Mr. Frederick will
not refuse to come and make her laugh. Mrs. Theresa has taken care to
provide a few macaroons for her little favourite, who said she was
particularly fond of them the other day. Mrs. Theresa hopes they will
all come at six, or before, not forgetting Miss Sophy, if she will
condescend to be of the party." At the first reading of this note, "the entertaining" Mr. Frederick, and
the "charming" Miss Marianne laughed heartily, and looked at Sophy, as if
they were afraid that she should think it possible they could like such
gross flattery; but upon a second perusal, Marianne observed that it
certainly was very good-natured of Mrs. Theresa to remember the
macaroons; and Frederick allowed that it was wrong to laugh at the poor
woman because she had the headache. Then twisting the note in his
fingers, he appealed to Sophy:--

"Well, Sophy, leave off drawing for an instant," said Frederick, "and
tell us what answer can we send?" "Can!--we can send what answer we please." "Yes, I know that," said Frederick. "I would refuse if I could; but we
ought not to do anything rude, should we? So I think we might as well
go, because we could not refuse, if we would, I say." "You have made such confusion," replied Sophy, "between 'couldn't' and
'wouldn't' and 'shouldn't,' that I can't understand you; surely they are
all different things." "Different! no," cried Frederick--"could, would, should, might, and
ought, are all the same thing in the Latin grammar; all of 'em signs of
the potential mood, you know." Sophy, whose powers of reasoning were not to be confounded, even by
quotations from the Latin grammar, looked up soberly from her drawing,
and answered "that very likely those words might be signs of the same
thing in the Latin grammar, but she believed that they meant perfectly
different things in real life." "That's just as people please," said her sophistical brother. "You know
words mean nothing in themselves. If I choose to call my hat my
cadwallader, you would understand me just as well, after I had once
explained it to you, that by cadwallader I meant this black thing that I
put upon my head; cadwallader and hat would then be just the same thing
to you." "Then why have two words for the same thing?" said Sophy; "and what has
this to do with 'could' and 'should'? You wanted to prove--"

"I wanted to prove," interrupted Frederick, "that it's not worth while to
dispute for two hours about two words. Do keep to the point, Sophy, and
don't dispute with me." "I was not disputing, I was reasoning." "Well, reasoning or disputing. Women have no business to do either; for,
how should they know how to chop logic like men?" At this contemptuous sarcasm upon her sex, Sophy's colour rose. "There!" cried Frederick, exulting, "now we shall see a philosopheress in
a passion; I'd give sixpence, half-price, for a harlequin entertainment,
to see Sophy in a passion. Now, Marianne, look at her brush dabbing so
fast in the water!" Sophy, who could not easily bear to be laughed at, with some little
indignation, said, "Brother, I wish--"

"There! there!" cried Frederick, pointing to the colour which rose in her
cheeks almost to her temples--"rising! rising! rising! look at the
thermometer! blood heat! blood! fever heat! boiling water heat! Marianne." "Then," said Sophy, smiling, "you should stand a little farther off, both
of you. Leave the thermometer to itself a little while. Give it time to
cool. It will come down to 'temperate' by the time you look again." "Oh, brother!" cried Marianne, "she's so good-humoured, don't tease her
any more, and don't draw heads upon her paper, and don't stretch her
india-rubber, and don't let us dirty any more of her brushes. See! the
sides of her tumbler are all manner of colours." "Oh, I only mixed red, blue, green and yellow, to show you, Marianne,
that all colours mixed together make white. But she is temperate now,
and I won't plague her; she shall chop logic, if she likes it, though she
is a woman." "But that's not fair, brother," said Marianne, "to say 'woman' in that
way. I'm sure Sophy found out how to tie that difficult knot, which papa
showed us yesterday, long before you did, though you are a man." "Not long," said Frederick. "Besides, that was only a conjuring trick." "It was very ingenious, though," said Marianne; "and papa said so. Besides, she understood the 'Rule of Three,' which was no conjuring
trick, better than you did, though she is a woman; and she can reason,
too, mamma says." "Very well, let her reason away," said the provoking wit. "All I have to
say is, that she'll never be able to make a pudding." "Why not, pray, brother?" inquired Sophy, looking up again, very gravely. "Why, you know papa himself, the other day at dinner, said that the woman
who talks Greek and Latin as well as I do, is a fool after all; and that
she had better have learned something useful; and Mrs. Tattle said, she'd
answer for it she did not know how to make a pudding." "Well! but I am not talking Greek and Latin, am I?" "No, but you are drawing, and that's the same thing." "The same thing! Oh, Frederick!" said little Marianne, laughing. "You may laugh; but I say it is the same sort of thing. Women who are
always drawing and reasoning, never know how to make puddings. Mrs.
Theresa Tattle said so, when I showed her Sophy's beautiful drawing
yesterday." "Mrs. Theresa Tattle might say so," replied Sophy, calmly; "but I do not
perceive the reason, brother, why drawing should prevent me from learning
how to make a pudding." "Well, I say you'll never learn how to make a good pudding." "I have learned," continued Sophy, who was mixing her colours, "to mix
such and such colours together to make the colour that I want; and why
should I not be able to learn to mix flour and butter, and sugar and egg,
together, to produce the taste that I want." "Oh, but mixing will never do, unless you know the quantities, like a
cook; and you would never learn the right quantities." "How did the cook learn them? Cannot I learn them as she did?" "Yes, but you'd never do it exactly, and mind the spoonfuls right, by the
recipe, like a cook." "Indeed! indeed! but she would," cried Marianne, eagerly:  "and a great
deal more exactly, for mamma has taught her to weigh and measure things
very carefully:  and when I was ill she always weighed the bark in
nicely, and dropped my drops so carefully:  better than the cook. When
mamma took me down to see the cook make a cake once, I saw her spoonfuls,
and her ounces, and her handfuls:  she dashed and splashed without
minding exactness or the recipe, or anything. I'm sure Sophy would make
a much better pudding, if exactness only were wanting." "Well, granting that she could make the best pudding in the whole world,
what does that signify? I say she never would:  so it comes to the same
thing." "Never would! how can you tell that, brother?" "Why, now look at her, with her books, and her drawings, and all this
apparatus. Do you think she would ever jump up, with all her nicety,
too, and put by all these things, to go down into the greasy kitchen, and
plump up to the elbows in suet, like a cook, for a plum-pudding?" "I need not plump up to the elbows, brother," said Sophy, smiling:  "nor
is it necessary that I should be a cook:  but, if it were necessary, I
hope I should be able to make a pudding." "Yes, yes," cried Marianne, warmly; "and she would jump up, and put by
all her things in a minute if it were necessary, and run down stairs and
up again like lightning, or do anything that was ever so disagreeable to
her, even about the suet, with all her nicety, brother, I assure you, as
she used to do anything, everything for me, when I was ill last winter. Oh, brother, she can do anything; and she could make the best plum-
pudding in the whole world, I'm sure, in a minute, if it were necessary." CHAPTER II. A knock at the door, from Mrs. Theresa Tattle's servant, recalled
Marianne to the business of the day. "There," said Frederick, "we have sent no answer all this time. It's
necessary to think of that in a minute." The servant came with his mistress' compliments, to let the young ladies
and Mr. Frederick know that she was waiting tea for them. "Waiting! then we must go," said Frederick. The servant opened the door wider, to let him pass, and Marianne thought
she must follow her brother:  so they went downstairs together, while
Sophy gave her own message to the servant, and quietly stayed at her
usual occupations. Mrs. Tattle was seated at her tea-table, with a large plate of macaroons
beside her when Frederick and Marianne entered. She was "delighted" they
were come, and "grieved" not to see Miss Sophy along with them. Marianne
coloured a little; for though she had precipitately followed her brother,
and though he had quieted her conscience for a moment by saying "You know
papa and mamma told us to do what we thought best," yet she did not feel
quite pleased with herself:  and it was not till after Mrs. Theresa had
exhausted all her compliments, and half her macaroons, that she could
restore her spirits to their usual height. "Come, Mr. Frederick," said she after tea, "you promised to make me
laugh; and nobody can make me laugh so well as yourself." "Oh, brother," said Marianne, "show Mrs. Theresa Dr. Carbuncle eating his
dinner; and I'll be Mrs. Carbuncle." Marianne. Now, my dear, what shall I help you to? Frederick. "My dear!" she never calls him my dear, you know, but always
Doctor. Mar. Well then, doctor, what will you eat to-day? Fred. Eat, madam! eat! nothing! nothing! I don't see anything here I
can eat, ma'am. Mar. Here's eels, sir; let me help you to some eel--stewed eel;--you
used to be fond of stewed eel. Fred. Used, ma'am, used! But I'm sick of stewed eels. You would tire
one of anything. Am I to see nothing but eels? And what's this at the
bottom? Mar. Mutton, doctor, roast mutton; if you'll be so good as to cut it. Fred. Cut it, ma'am! I can't cut it, I say; it's as hard as a deal
board. You might as well tell me to cut the table, ma'am. Mutton,
indeed! not a bit of fat. Roast mutton, indeed! not a drop of gravy. Mutton, truly! quite a cinder. I'll have none of it. Here, take it
away; take it downstairs to the cook. It's a very hard case, Mrs.
Carbuncle, that I can never have a bit of anything that I can eat at my
own table, Mrs. Carbuncle, since I was married, ma'am, I that am the
easiest man in the whole world to please about my dinner. It's really
very extraordinary, Mrs. Carbuncle! What have you at that corner there,
under the cover? Mar. Patties, sir; oyster patties. Fred. Patties, ma'am! kickshaws! I hate kickshaws. Not worth putting
under a cover, ma'am. And why not have glass covers, that one may see
one's dinner before one, before it grows cold with asking questions, Mrs.
Carbuncle, and lifting up covers? But nobody has any sense:  and I see
no water plates anywhere, lately. Mar. Do, pray, doctor, let me help you to a bit of chicken before it
gets cold, my dear. Fred. (aside). "My dear," again, Marianne! Mar. Yes, brother, because she is frightened, you know, and Mrs.
Carbuncle always says "my dear" to him when she's frightened, and looks
so pale from side to side; and sometimes she cries before dinner's done,
and then all the company are quite silent, and don't know what to do." "Oh, such a little creature; to have so much sense, too!" exclaimed Mrs.
Theresa, with rapture. "Mr. Frederick, you'll make me die with laughing! Pray go on, Dr. Carbuncle." Fred. Well, ma'am, then if I must eat something, send me a bit of fowl;
a leg and wing, the liver wing, and a bit of the breast, oyster sauce,
and a slice of that ham, if you please, ma'am. (Dr. Carbuncle eats voraciously, with his head down to his plate, and,
dropping the sauce, he buttons up his coat tight across the breast.) Fred. Here; a plate, knife and fork, bit o' bread, a glass of Dorchester
ale! "Oh, admirable!" exclaimed Mrs. Tattle, clapping her hands. "Now, brother, suppose that it is after dinner," said Marianne; "and show
us how the doctor goes to sleep." Frederick threw himself back in an arm-chair, leaning his head back, with
his mouth open, snoring; nodded from time to time, crossed and uncrossed
his legs, tried to awake himself by twitching his wig, settling his
collar, blowing his nose and rapping on the lid of his snuff-box. All which infinitely diverted Mrs. Tattle, who, when she could stop
herself from laughing, declared "It made her sigh, too, to think of the
life poor Mrs. Carbuncle led with that man, and all for nothing, too; for
her jointure was nothing, next to nothing, though a great thing, to be
sure, her friends thought for her, when she was only Sally Ridgeway
before she was married. Such a wife as she makes," continued Mrs.
Theresa, lifting up her hands and eyes to heaven, "and so much as she has
gone through, the brute ought to be ashamed of himself if he does not
leave her something extraordinary in his will; for turn it which way she
will, she can never keep a carriage, or live like anybody else, on her
jointure, after all, she tells me, poor soul! A sad prospect, after her
husband's death, to look forward to, instead of being comfortable, as her
friends expected; and she, poor young thing! knowing no better when they
married her! People should look into these things, beforehand, or never
marry at all, I say, Miss Marianne." Miss Marianne, who did not clearly comprehend this affair of the
jointure, or the reason why Mrs. Carbuncle would be so unhappy after her
husband's death, turned to Frederick, who was at that instant studying
Mrs. Theresa as a future character to mimic. "Brother," said Marianne,
"now sing an Italian song for us like Miss Croker. Pray, Miss Croker,
favour us with a song. Mrs. Theresa Tattle has never had the pleasure of
hearing you sing; she's quite impatient to hear you sing." "Yes, indeed, I am," said Mrs. Theresa. Frederick put his hands before him affectedly; "Oh, indeed, ma'am! indeed, ladies! I really am so hoarse, it distresses me so to be pressed
to sing; besides, upon my word, I have quite left off singing. I've
never sung once, except for very particular people, this winter." Mar. But Mrs. Theresa Tattle is a very particular person. I'm sure
you'll sing for her. Fred. Certainly, ma'am, I allow that you use a powerful argument; but I
assure you now, I would do my best to oblige you, but I absolutely have
forgotten all my English songs. Nobody hears anything but Italian now,
and I have been so giddy as to leave my Italian music behind me. Besides, I make it a rule never to hazard myself without an
accompaniment. Mar. Oh, try, Miss Croker, for once. [Frederick sings, after much preluding.] Violante in the pantry,
     Gnawing of a mutton-bone;
          How she gnawed it,
          How she claw'd it,
     When she found herself alone! "Charming!" exclaimed Mrs. Tattle; "so like Miss Croker, I'm sure I shall
think of you, Mr. Frederick, when I hear her asked to sing again. Her
voice, however, introduces her to very pleasant parties, and she's a girl
that's very much taken notice of, and I don't doubt will go off vastly
well. She's a particular favourite of mine, you must know; and I mean to
do her a piece of service the first opportunity, by saying something or
other, that shall go round to her relations in Northumberland, and make
them do something for her; as well they may, for they are all rolling in
gold, and won't give her a penny." Mar. Now, brother, read the newspaper like Counsellor Puff. "Oh, pray do, Mr. Frederick, for I declare I admire you of all things! You are quite yourself to-night. Here's a newspaper, sir, pray let us
have Counsellor Puff. It's not late." [Frederick reads in a pompous voice.] "As a delicate white hand has ever been deemed a distinguishing ornament
in either sex, Messrs. Valiant and Wise conceive it to be their duty to
take the earliest opportunity to advertise the nobility and gentry of
Great Britain in general, and their friends in particular, that they have
now ready for sale, as usual, at the Hippocrates' Head, a fresh
assortment of new-invented, much admired, primrose soap. To prevent
impositions and counterfeits, the public are requested to take notice,
that the only genuine primrose soap is stamped on the outside, 'Valiant
and Wise.'" "Oh, you most incomparable mimic! 'tis absolutely the counsellor himself. I absolutely must show you, some day, to my friend Lady Battersby; you'd
absolutely make her die with laughing; and she'd quite adore you," said
Mrs. Theresa, who was well aware that every pause must be filled with
flattery. "Pray go on, pray go on. I shall never be tired, if I sit
looking at you these hundred years." Stimulated by these plaudits, Frederick proceeded to show how Colonel
Epaulette blew his nose, flourished his cambric handkerchief, bowed to
Lady Diana Periwinkle, and admired her work, saying, "Done by no hands,
as you may guess, but those of Fairly Fair." Whilst Lady Diana, he
observed, simpered so prettily, and took herself so quietly for Fairly
Fair, not perceiving that the colonel was admiring his own nails all the
while. Next to Colonel Epaulette, Frederick, at Marianne's particular desire,
came into the room like Sir Charles Slang. "Very well, brother," cried she, "your hand down to the very bottom of
your pocket, and your other shoulder up to your ear; but you are not
quite wooden enough, and you should walk as if your hip were out of
joint. There now, Mrs. Tattle, are not those good eyes? They stare so
like his, without seeming to see anything all the while." "Excellent! admirable! Mr. Frederick. I must say that you are the best
mimic of your age I ever saw, and I'm sure Lady Battersby will think so
too. That is Sir Charles to the very life. But with all that, you must
know he's a mighty pleasant, fashionable young man when you come to know
him, and has a great deal of sense under all that, and is of a very good
family--the Slangs, you know. Sir Charles will come into a fine fortune
himself next year, if he can keep clear of gambling, which I hear is his
foible, poor young man! Pray go on. I interrupt you, Mr. Frederick." "Now, brother," said Marianne. "No, Marianne, I can do no more. I'm quite tired, and I will do no
more," said Frederick, stretching himself at full length upon a sofa. Even in the midst of laughter, and whilst the voice of flattery yet
sounded in his ear, Frederick felt sad, displeased with himself, and
disgusted with Mrs. Theresa. "What a deep sigh was there!" said Mrs. Theresa; "what can make you sigh
so bitterly? You, who make everybody else laugh. Oh, such another sigh
again!" "Marianne," cried Frederick, "do you remember the man in the mask?" "What man in the mask, brother?" "The man--the actor--the buffoon, that my father told us of, who used to
cry behind the mask that made everybody else laugh." "Cry! bless me," said Mrs. Theresa, "mighty odd! very extraordinary! but
one can't be surprised at meeting with extraordinary characters amongst
that race of people, actors by profession, you know; for they are brought
up from the egg to make their fortune, or at least their bread by their
oddities. But, my dear Mr. Frederick, you are quite pale, quite
exhausted; no wonder--what will you have? a glass of cowslip-wine?" "Oh no, thank you, ma'am," said Frederick. "Oh yes; indeed you must not leave me without taking something; and Miss
Marianne must have another macaroon. I insist upon it," said Mrs.
Theresa, ringing the bell. "It is not late, and my man Christopher will
bring up the cowslip-wine in a minute." "But, Sophy! and papa and mamma, you know, will come home presently,"
said Marianne. "Oh! Miss Sophy has her books and drawings. You know she's never afraid
of being alone. Besides, to-night it was her own choice. And as to your
papa and mamma, they won't be home to-night, I'm pretty sure; for a
gentleman, who had it from their own authority, told me where they were
going, which is further off than they think; but they did not consult me;
and I fancy they'll be obliged to sleep out; so you need not be in a
hurry about them. We'll have candles." The door opened just as Mrs. Tattle was going to ring the bell again for
candles and the cowslip-wine. "Christopher! Christopher!" said Mrs.
Theresa, who was standing at the fire, with her back to the door, when it
opened, "Christopher! pray bring--Do you hear?" but no Christopher
answered; and, upon turning round, Mrs. Tattle, instead of Christopher,
beheld two little black figures, which stood perfectly still and silent. It was so dark, that their forms could scarcely be discerned. "In the name of heaven, who and what may you be? Speak, I conjure you! what are ye?" "The chimney-sweepers, ma'am, an' please your ladyship." "Chimney-sweepers!" repeated Frederick and Marianne, bursting out a-
laughing. "Chimney-sweepers!" repeated Mrs. Theresa, provoked at the recollection
of her late solemn address to them. "Chimney-sweepers! and could not you
say so a little sooner? Pray, what brings you here, gentlemen, at this
time of night?" "The bell rang, ma'am,", answered a squeaking voice. "The bell rang! yes, for Christopher. The boy's mad, or drunk." "Ma'am," said the tallest of the chimney-sweepers, who had not yet
spoken, and who now began in a very blunt manner; "ma'am, your brother
desired us to come up when the bell rang; so we did." "My brother? I have no brother, dunce," said Mrs. Theresa. "Mr. Eden, madam." "Ho, ho!" said Mrs. Tattle, in a more complacent tone, "the boy takes me
for Miss Bertha Eden, I perceive"; and, flattered to be taken in the dark
by a chimney-sweeper for a young and handsome lady, Mrs. Theresa laughed,
and informed him "that they had mistaken the room; and they must go up
another pair of stairs, and turn to the left." The chimney-sweeper with the squeaking voice bowed, thanked her ladyship
for this information, said, "Good night to ye, quality"; and they both
moved towards the door. "Stay," said Mrs. Tattle, whose curiosity was excited; "what can the
Edens want with chimney-sweepers at this time o' night, I wonder? Christopher, did you hear anything about it?" said the lady to her
footman, who was now lighting the candles. "Upon my word, ma'am," said the servant, "I can't say; but I'll step down
below and inquire. I heard them talking about it in the kitchen; but I
only got a word here and there, for I was hunting for the snuff-dish, as
I knew it must be for candles when I heard the bell ring, ma'am; so I
thought to find the snuff-dish before I answered the bell, for I knew it
must be for candles you rang. But, if you please, I'll step down now,
ma'am, and see about the chimney-sweepers." "Yes, step down, do; and, Christopher, bring up the cowslip-wine, and
some more macaroons for my little Marianne." Marianne withdrew rather coldly from a kiss which Mrs. Tattle was going
to give her; for she was somewhat surprised at the familiarity with which
this lady talked to her footman. She had not been accustomed to these
familiarities in her father and mother, and she did not like them. "Well," said Mrs. Tattle to Christopher, who was now returned, "what is
the news?" "Ma'am, the little fellow with the squeaking voice has been telling me
the whole story. The other morning, ma'am, early, he and the other were
down the hill sweeping in Paradise Row. Those chimneys, they say, are
difficult; and the square fellow, ma'am, the biggest of the two boys, got
wedged in the chimney. The other little fellow was up at the top at the
time, and he heard the cry; but in his fright, and all, he did not know
what to do, ma'am; for he looked about from the top of the chimney, and
not a soul could he see stirring, but a few that he could not make attend
to his screech; the boy within almost stifling too. So he screeched, and
screeched, all he could; and by the greatest chance in life, ma'am, old
Mr. Eden was just going down the hill to fetch his morning walk." "Ay," interrupted Mrs. Theresa, "friend Ephraim is one of your early
risers." "Well," said Marianne, impatiently. "So, ma'am, hearing the screech, he turns and sees the sweep; and at once
he understands the matter--"

"I'm sure he must have taken some time to understand it," interposed Mrs.
Tattle, "for he's the slowest creature breathing, and the deafest in
company. Go on, Christopher. So the sweep did make him hear." "So he says, ma'am; and so the old gentleman went in and pulled the boy
out of the chimney, with much ado, ma'am." "Bless me!" exclaimed Mrs. Theresa; "but did old Eden go up the chimney
himself after the boy, wig and all? "Why, ma'am," said Christopher, with a look of great delight, "that was
all as one, as the very 'dentical words I put to the boy myself, when he
telled me his story. But, ma'am, that was what I couldn't get out of
him, neither, rightly, for he is a churl--the big boy that was stuck in
the chimney, I mean; for when I put the question to him about the wig,
laughing like, he wouldn't take it laughing like at all; but would only
make answer to us like a bear, 'He saved my life, that's all I know'; and
this over again, ma'am, to all the kitchen round, that cross-questioned
him. But I finds him stupid and ill-mannered like, for I offered him a
shilling, ma'am, myself, to tell about the wig; but he put it back in a
way that did not become such as he, to no lady's butler, ma'am; whereupon
I turns to the slim fellow (and he's smarterer, and more mannerly, ma'am,
with a tongue in his head for his betters), but he could not resolve me
my question either; for he was up at the top of the chimney the best part
o' the time:  and when he came down Mr. Eden had his wig on, but had his
arm all bare and bloody, ma'am." "Poor Mr. Eden!" exclaimed Marianne. "Oh, miss," continued the servant, "and the chimney-sweep himself was so
bruised, and must have been killed." "Well, well! but he's alive now; go on with your story, Christopher,"
said Mrs. T.  "Chimney-sweepers get wedged in chimneys every day; it's
part of their trade, and it's a happy thing when they come off with a few
bruises. *  To be sure," added she, observing that both Frederick and
Marianne looked displeased at this speech, "to be sure, if one may
believe this story, there was some real danger." *This atrocious practice is now happily superseded by the use of sweeping
machines. "Real danger! yes, indeed," said Marianne; "and I'm sure I think Mr. Eden
was very good." "Certainly it was a most commendable action, and quite providential. So
I shall take an opportunity of saying, when I tell the story in all
companies; and the boy may thank his kind stars, I'm sure, to the end of
his days, for such an escape--But pray, Christopher," said she,
persisting in her conversation with Christopher, who was now laying the
cloth for supper, "pray, which house was it in Paradise Row? where the
Eagles or the Miss Ropers lodge? or which?" "It was at my Lady Battersby's, ma'am." "Ha! ha!" cried Mrs. Theresa, "I thought we should get to the bottom of
the affair at last. This is excellent! This will make an admirable
story for my Lady Battersby the next time I see her. These Quakers are
so sly! Old Eden, I know, has long wanted to obtain an introduction into
that house; and a charming charitable expedient hit upon! My Lady
Battersby will enjoy this, of all things." CHAPTER III. "Now," continued Mrs. Theresa, turning to Frederick, as soon as the
servant had left the room, "now, Mr. Frederick Montague, I have a favour-
-such a favour--to ask of you; it's a favour which only you can grant;
you have such talents, and would do the thing so admirably; and my Lady
Battersby would quite adore you for it. She will do me the honour to be
here to spend an evening to-morrow. I'm convinced Mr. and Mrs. Montague
will find themselves obliged to stay out another day, and I so long to
show you off to her ladyship; and your Doctor Carbuncle, and your
Counsellor Puff, and your Miss Croker, and all your charming characters. You must let me introduce you to her ladyship to-morrow evening. Promise
me." "Oh, ma'am," said Frederick, "I cannot promise you any such thing,
indeed. I am much obliged to you; but indeed I cannot come." "Why not, my dear sir? why not? You don't think I mean you should
promise, if you are certain your papa and mamma will be home." "If they do come home, I will ask them about it," said Frederick,
hesitating; for though he by no means wished to accept the invitation, he
had not yet acquired the necessary power of decidedly saying No. "Ask them!" repeated Mrs. Theresa. "My dear sir, at your age, must you
ask your papa and mamma about such things?" "Must! no, ma'am," said Frederick; "but I said I would. I know I need
not, because my father and mother always let me judge for myself almost
about everything." "And about this, I am sure," cried Marianne. "Papa and mamma, you know,
just as they were going away, said, 'If Mrs. Theresa asks you to come, do
as you think best'"

"Well, then," said Mrs. Theresa, "you know it rests with yourselves, if
you may do as you please." "To be sure I may, madam," said Frederick, colouring from that species of
emotion which is justly called false shame, and which often conquers real
shame; "to be sure, ma'am, I may do as I please." "Then I may make sure of you," said Mrs. Theresa; "for now it would be
downright rudeness to tell a lady you won't do as she pleases. Mr.
Frederick Montague, I'm sure, is too wellbred a young gentleman to do so
unpolite, so ungallant a thing!" The jargon of politeness and gallantry is frequently brought by the silly
acquaintance of young people to confuse their simple morality and clear
good sense. A new and unintelligible system is presented to them, in a
language foreign to their understanding, and contradictory to their
feelings. They hesitate between new motives and old principles. From
the fear of being thought ignorant, they become affected; and from the
dread of being thought to be children act like fools. But all this they
feel only when they are in the company of such people as Mrs. Theresa
Tattle. "Ma'am," Frederick began, "I don't mean to be rude; but I hope you'll
excuse me from coming to drink tea with you to-morrow, because my father
and mother are not acquainted with Lady Battersby, and maybe they might
not like--"

"Take care, take care," said Mrs. Theresa, laughing at his perplexity:
"you want to get off from obliging me, and you don't know how. You had
very nearly made a most shocking blunder in putting it all upon poor Lady
Battersby. Now you know it's impossible that Mr. and Mrs. Montague could
have in nature the slightest objection to introducing you to my Lady
Battersby at my own house; for, don't you know, that, besides her
ladyship's many unquestionable qualities, which one need not talk of, she
is cousin, but once removed, to the Trotters of Lancashire--your mother's
great favourites? And there is not a person at the Wells, I'll venture
to say, could be of more advantage to your sister Sophy, in the way of
partners, when she comes to go the balls, which it's to be supposed she
will, some time or other; and as you are so good a brother, that's a
thing to be looked to, you know. Besides, as to yourself, there's
nothing her ladyship delights in so much as in a good mimic; and she'll
quite adore you!" "But I don't want her to adore me, ma'am," said Frederick, bluntly; then,
correcting himself, added, "I mean for being a mimic." "Why not, my love? Between friends, can there be any harm in showing
one's talents? You that have such talents to show. She'll keep your
secret, I'll answer for her; and," added she, "you needn't be afraid of
her criticism; for, between you and me, she's no great critic; so you'll
come. Well, thank you, that's settled. How you have made me beg and
pray! but you know your own value, I see; as you entertaining people
always do. One must ask a wit, like a fine singer, so often. Well, but
now for the favour I was going to ask you." Frederick looked surprised; for he thought that the favour of his company
was what she meant:  but she explained herself farther. "As to the old Quaker who lodges above, old Ephraim Eden--my Lady
Battersby and I have so much diversion about him. He is the best
character, the oddest creature! If you were but to see him come into the
rooms with those stiff skirts, or walking with his eternal sister Bertha,
and his everlasting broad-brimmed hat! One knows him a mile off! But
then his voice and way, and altogether, if one could get them to the
life, they'd be better than anything on the stage; better even than
anything I've seen to-night; and I think you'd make a capital Quaker for
my Lady Battersby; but then the thing is, one can never get to hear the
old quiz talk. Now you, who have so much invention and cleverness--I
have no invention myself; but could you not hit upon some way of seeing
him, so that you might get him by heart? I'm sure you, who are so quick,
would only want to see him, and hear him, for half a minute, to be able
to take him off, so as to kill one with laughing. But I have no
invention." "Oh, as to the invention," said Frederick, "I know an admirable way of
doing the thing, if that is all; but then remember, I don't say I will do
the thing, for I will not. But I know a way of getting up into his room,
and seeing him, without his knowing me to be there." "Oh, tell it me, you charming, clever creature!" "But, remember, I do not say I will do it." "Well, well, let us hear it; and you shall do as you please afterwards. Merciful goodness!" exclaimed Mrs. Tattle, "do my ears deceive me? I
declare I looked round, and thought I heard the squeaking chimney-sweeper
was in the room!" "So did I, Frederick, I declare," cried Marianne, laughing, "I never
heard anything so like his voice in my life." Frederick imitated the squeaking voice of this chimney-sweeper to great
perfection. "Now," continued he, "this fellow is just my height. The old Quaker, if
my face were blackened, and if I were to change clothes with the chimney-
sweeper, I'll answer for it, would never know me." "Oh, it's an admirable invention! I give you infinite credit for it!" exclaimed Mrs. Theresa. "It shall, it must be done. I'll ring, and have
the fellow up this minute." "Oh, no; do not ring," said Frederick, stopping her hand, "I don't mean
to do it. You know you promised that I should do as I pleased. I only
told you my invention." "Well, well; but only let me ring, and ask whether the chimney-sweepers
are below. You shall do as you please afterwards." "Christopher, shut the door. Christopher," said she to the servant who
came up when she rang, "pray are the sweeps gone yet?" "No, ma'am." "But have they been up to old Eden yet?" "Oh, no, ma'am; nor be not to go till the bell rings; for Miss Bertha,
ma'am, was asleep a-lying down, and her brother wouldn't have her wakened
on no account whatsomever. He came down hisself to the kitchen to the
sweeps, though; but wouldn't have, as I heard him say, his sister waked
for no account. But Miss Bertha's bell will ring when she wakens for the
sweeps, ma'am. 'Twas she wanted to see the boy as her brother saved, and
I suppose sent for him to give him something charitable, ma'am." "Well, never mind your suppositions," said Mrs. Theresa; "run down this
very minute to the little squeaking chimney-sweep, and send him up to me. Quick, but don't let the other bear come up with him." Christopher, who had curiosity, as well as his mistress, when he returned
with the chimney-sweeper, prolonged his own stay in the room by sweeping
the hearth, throwing down the tongs and shovel, and picking them up
again. "That will do, Christopher! Christopher, that will do, I say," Mrs.
Theresa repeated in vain. She was obliged to say, "Christopher, you may
go," before he would depart. "Now," said she to Frederick, "step in here to the next room with this
candle, and you'll be equipped in an instant. Only just change clothes
with the boy; only just let me see what a charming chimney-sweeper you'd
make. You shall do as you please afterwards." "Well, I'll only change clothes with him, just to show you for one
minute." "But," said Marianne to Mrs. Theresa whilst Frederick was changing his
clothes, "I think Frederick is right about--"

"About what, love?" "I think he is in the right not to go up, though he can do it so easily,
to see that gentleman; I mean on purpose to mimic and laugh at him
afterwards. I don't think that would be quite right." "Why, pray, Miss Marianne?" "Why, because he is so good-natured to his sister. He would not let her
be wakened." "Dear, it's easy to be good in such little things; and he won't have long
to be good to her neither; for I don't think she will trouble him long in
this world, anyhow." "What do you mean?" said Marianne. "That she'll die, child." "Die! die with that beautiful colour in her cheeks! How sorry her poor,
poor brother will be! But she will not die, I'm sure, for she walks
about and runs upstairs so lightly! Oh, you must be quite mistaken, I
hope." "If I'm mistaken, Dr. Panado Cardamum's mistaken too, then, that's my
comfort. He says, unless the waters work a miracle, she stands a bad
chance; and she won't follow my advice, and consult the doctor for her
health." "He would frighten her to death, perhaps," said Marianne. "I hope
Frederick won't go up to disturb her." "Lud, child, you are turned simpleton all of a sudden; how can your
brother disturb her more than the real chimney-sweeper?" "But I don't think it's right," persisted Marianne, "and I shall tell him
so." "Nay, Miss Marianne, I don't commend you now. Young ladies should not be
so forward to give opinions and advice to their elder brothers unasked;
and I presume that Mr. Frederick and I must know what's right as well as
Miss Marianne. Hush! here he is. Oh, the capital figure!" cried Mrs.
Theresa. "Bravo, bravo!" cried she, as Frederick entered in the chimney-
sweeper's dress; and as he spoke, saying, "I'm afraid, please your
ladyship, to dirt your ladyship's carpet," she broke out into immoderate
raptures, calling him "her charming chimney-sweeper!" and repeating that
she knew beforehand the character would do for him. Mrs. Theresa instantly rang the bell, in spite of all expostulation--
ordered Christopher to send up the other chimney-sweeper--triumphed in
observing that Christopher did not know Frederick when he came into the
room; and offered to lay any wager that the other chimney-sweeper would
mistake him for his companion. And so he did; and when Frederick spoke,
the voice was so very like, that it was scarcely possible that he should
have perceived the difference. Marianne was diverted by this scene; but she started, when in the midst
of it they heard a bell ring. "That's the lady's bell, and we must go," said the blunt chimney-sweeper. "Go, then, about your business," said Mrs. Theresa, "and here's a
shilling for you, to drink, my honest fellow. I did not know you were so
much bruised when I first saw you. I won't detain you. Go," said she,
pushing Frederick towards the door. Marianne sprang forward to speak to
him; but Mrs. Theresa kept her off; and, though Frederick resisted, the
lady shut the door upon him by superior force, and, having locked it,
there was no retreat. Mrs. Tattle and Marianne waited impatiently for
Frederick's return. "I hear them," cried Marianne, "I hear them coming downstairs." They
listened again, and all was silent. At length they suddenly heard a
great noise of many steps in the hall. "Merciful!" exclaimed Mrs. Theresa, "it must be your father and mother
come back." Marianne ran to unlock the room door, and Mrs. Theresa
followed her into the hall. The hall was rather dark, but under the lamp
a crowd of people, all the servants in the house having gathered
together. As Mrs. Theresa approached, the crowd opened in silence, and in the midst
she beheld Frederick, with blood streaming from his face. His head was
held by Christopher; and the chimney-sweeper was holding a basin for him. "Merciful! what will become of me?" exclaimed Mrs. Theresa. "Bleeding! he'll bleed to death! Can nobody think of anything that will stop blood
in a minute? A key, a large key down his back--a key--has nobody a key? Mr. and Mrs. Montague will be here before he has done bleeding. A key! cobwebs! a puff ball! for mercy's sake! Can nobody think of anything that
will stop blood in a minute? Gracious me! he'll bleed to death, I
believe." "He'll bleed to death! Oh, my brother!" cried Marianne, catching hold of
the words; and terrified, she ran upstairs, crying, "Sophy, oh, Sophy! come down this minute, or he'll be dead! My brother's bleeding to death! Sophy! Sophy! come down, or he'll be dead!" "Let go the basin, you," said Christopher, pulling the basin out of the
chimney-sweeper's hand, who had all this time stood in silence; "you are
not fit to hold the basin for a gentleman." "Let him hold it," said Frederick; "he did not mean to hurt me." "That's more than he deserves. I'm certain sure he might have known well
enough it was Mr. Frederick all the time, and he'd no business to go to
fight--such a one as he--with a gentleman." "I did not know he was a gentleman!" said the chimney-sweeper, "how could
I?" "How could he, indeed!" said Frederick; "he shall hold the basin." "Gracious me! I'm glad to hear him speak like himself again, at
anyrate," cried Mrs. Theresa. "And here comes Miss Sophy, too." "Sophy!" cried Frederick. "Oh, Sophy, don't you come--don't look at me;
you'll despise me." "My brother! where? where?" said Sophy, looking, as she thought, at the
two chimney-sweepers. "It's Frederick," said Marianne:  "that's my brother." "Miss Sophy, don't be alarmed," Mrs. Theresa began; "but gracious
goodness! I wish Miss Bertha--"

At this instant a female figure in white appeared upon the stairs; she
passed swiftly on, whilst everyone gave way before her. "Oh, Miss
Bertha!" cried Mrs. Theresa, catching hold of her gown to stop her, as
she came near Frederick. "Oh, Miss Eden, your beautiful India muslin! take care of the chimney sweeper, for heaven's sake." But she pressed
forward. "It's my brother, will he die?" cried Marianne, throwing her arms round
her, and looking up as if to a being of a superior order. "Will he bleed
to death?" "No, my love!" answered a sweet voice:  "do not frighten thyself." "I've done bleeding," said Frederick. "Dear me, Miss Marianne, if you would not make such a rout," cried Mrs.
Tattle. "Miss Bertha, it's nothing but a frolic. You see Mr. Frederick
Montague only in a masquerade dress. Nothing in the world but a frolic,
ma'am. You see he's stopped bleeding. I was frightened out of my wits
at first. I thought it was his eye, but I see it's only his nose. All's
well that ends well. Mr. Frederick, we'll keep your counsel. Pray,
ma'am, let us ask no questions; it's only a boyish frolic. Come, Mr.
Frederick, this way, into my room, and I'll give you a towel and some
clean water, and you can get rid of this masquerade dress. Make haste,
for fear your father and mother should drop in upon us." "Do not be afraid of thy father and mother. They are surely thy best
friends," said a voice. It was the voice of an elderly gentleman, who
now stood behind Frederick. "Oh, sir, oh, Mr. Eden," said Frederick, turning to him. "Don't betray me! for goodness' sake!" whispered Mrs. Tattle, "say
nothing about me." "I'm not thinking about you. Let me speak," cried he, pushing away her
hand, which stopped his mouth. "I shall say nothing about you, I promise
you," said Frederick, with a look of contempt. "No, but for your own sake, my dear sir, your papa and mamma. Bless me! is not that Mrs. Montague's carriage?" "My brother, ma'am," said Sophy, "is not afraid of my father and mother's
coming back. Let him speak; he was going to speak the truth." "To be sure, Miss Sophia, I wouldn't hinder him from speaking the truth;
but it's not proper, I presume, ma'am, to speak truth at all times, and
in all places, and before everybody, servants and all. I only wanted,
ma'am, to hinder your brother from exposing himself. A hall, I
apprehend, is not a proper place for explanation." "Here," said Mr. Eden, opening the door of his room, which was on the
opposite side of the hall to Mrs. Tattle's. "Here is a place," said he
to Frederick, "where thou mayst speak the truth at all times, and before
everybody." "Nay, my room's at Mr. Frederick Montague's service, and my door's open
too. This way, pray," said she, pulling his arm. But Frederick broke
from her, and followed Mr. Eden. "Oh, sir, will you forgive me?" cried he. "Forgive thee!--and what have I to forgive!" "Forgive, brother, without asking what," said Bertha, smiling. "He shall know all!" cried Frederick; "all that concerns myself, I mean. Sir, I disguised myself in this dress; I came up to your room to-night on
purpose to see you, without your knowing it, that I might mimic you. The
chimney-sweeper, where is he?" said Frederick, looking round; and he ran
into the hall to see for him. "May he come in? he may--he is a brave, an
honest, good, grateful boy. He never guessed who I was. After we left
you we went down to the kitchen together, and there, fool as I was, for
the pleasure of making Mr. Christopher and the servants laugh, began to
mimic you. This boy said he would not stand by and hear you laughed at;
that you had saved his life; that I ought to be ashamed of myself; that
you had just given me half a crown; and so you had; but I went on, and
told him I'd knock him down if he said another word. He did; I gave the
first blow; we fought; I came to the ground; the servants pulled me up
again. They found out, I don't know how, that I was not a chimney-
sweeper. The rest you saw. And now can you forgive me, sir?" said
Frederick to Mr. Eden, seizing hold of his hand. "The other hand, friend," said the Quaker, gently withdrawing his right
hand, which everybody now observed was much swelled, and putting it into
his bosom again. "This, and welcome," offering his other hand to
Frederick, and shaking his with a smile. "Oh, that other hand!" said Frederick, "that was hurt, I remember. How
ill I have behaved--extremely ill! But this is a lesson that I shall
never forget as long as I live. I hope for the future I shall behave
like a gentleman." "And like a man--and like a good man, I am sure thou wilt," said the good
Quaker, shaking Frederick's hand affectionately; "or I am much mistaken,
friend, in that black countenance." "You are not mistaken," cried Marianne. "Frederick will never be
persuaded again by anybody to do what he does not think right:  and now,
brother, you may wash your black countenance." Just when Frederick had got rid of half his black countenance, a double
knock was heard at the door. It was Mr. and Mrs. Montague. "What will
you do now?" whispered Mrs. Theresa to Frederick, as his father and
mother came into the room. "A chimney-sweeper covered with blood!" exclaimed Mr. and Mrs. Montague. "Father, I am Frederick," said he, stepping forward towards them, as they
stood in astonishment. "Frederick! my son!" "Yes, mother, I'm not hurt half so much as I deserve; I'll tell you--"

"Nay," interrupted Bertha, "let my brother tell the story this time. Thou hast told it once, and told it well; no one but my brother could
tell it better." "A story never tells so well the second time, to be sure," said Mrs.
Theresa; "but Mr. Eden will certainly make the best of it." Without taking any notice of Mrs. Tattle, or her apprehensive looks, Mr.
Eden explained all he knew of the affair in a few words. "Your son,"
concluded he, "will quickly put off his dirty dress. The dress hath not
stained the mind; that is fair and honourable. When he found himself in
the wrong, he said so; nor was he in haste to conceal his adventure from
his father; this made me think well of both father and son. I speak
plainly, friend, for that is best. But what is become of the other
chimney-sweeper? He will want to go home," said Mr. Eden, turning to
Mrs. Theresa. Without making any reply, she hurried out of the room as
fast as possible, and returned in a few moments, with a look of extreme
consternation. "Here is a catastrophe indeed! Now, indeed, Mr. Frederick, your papa and
mamma have reason to be angry. A new suit of clothes!--the bare faced
villain! gone! no sign of them in my closet, or anywhere. The door was
locked; he must have gone up the chimney, out upon the leads, and so
escaped; but Christopher is after him. I protest, Mrs. Montague, you
take it too quietly. The wretch!--a new suit of clothes, blue coat and
buff waistcoat. I never heard of such a thing! I declare, Mr. Montague,
you are vastly good, not to be in a passion," added Mrs. Theresa. "Madam," replied Mr. Montague, with a look of much civil contempt, "I
think the loss of a suit of clothes, and even the disgrace that my son
has been brought to this evening, fortunate circumstances in his
education. He will, I am persuaded, judge and act for himself more
wisely in future. Nor will he be tempted to offend against humanity, for
the sake of being called 'The best mimic in the world.'" THE BARRING OUT; OR, PARTY SPIRIT. "The mother of mischief," says an old proverb, "is no bigger than a
midge's wing." At Doctor Middleton's school, there was a great tall dunce of the name of
Fisher, who never could be taught how to look out a word in the
dictionary. He used to torment everybody with--"Do pray help me! I
can't make out this one word." The person who usually helped him in his
distress was a very clever, good natured boy, of the name of De Grey, who
had been many years under Dr. Middleton's care, and who, by his abilities
and good conduct, did him great credit. The doctor certainly was both
proud and fond of him; but he was so well beloved, or so much esteemed by
his companions, that nobody had ever called him by the odious name of
favourite, until the arrival of a new scholar of the name of Archer. Till Archer came, the ideas of FAVOURITES and PARTIES were almost unknown
at Dr. Middleton's; but he brought all these ideas fresh from a great
public school, at which he had been educated--at which he had acquired a
sufficient quantity of Greek and Latin, and a superabundant quantity of
party spirit. His aim, the moment he came to a new school, was to get to
the head of it, or at least to form the strongest party. His influence,
for he was a boy of considerable abilities, was quickly felt, though he
had a powerful rival, as he thought proper to call him, in De Grey; and,
with HIM, a rival was always an enemy. De Grey, so far from giving him
any cause of hatred, treated him with a degree of cordiality, which would
probably have had an effect upon Archer's mind, if it had not been for
the artifices of Fisher. It may seem surprising, that a GREAT DUNCE should be able to work upon a
boy like an Archer, who was called a great genius; but when genius is
joined to a violent temper, instead of being united to good sense, it is
at the mercy even of dunces. Fisher was mortally offended one morning by De Grey's refusing to
translate his whole lesson for him. He went over to Archer, who,
considering him as a partisan deserting from the enemy, received him with
open arms, and translated his whole lesson without expressing MUCH
contempt for his stupidity. From this moment Fisher forgot all De Grey's
former kindness, and considered only how he could in his turn mortify the
person whom he felt to be so much his superior. De Grey and Archer were now reading for a premium, which was to be given
in their class. Fisher betted on Archer's head, who had not sense enough
to despise the bet of a blockhead. On the contrary he suffered him to
excite the spirit of rivalship in its utmost fury by collecting the bets
of all the school. So that this premium now became a matter of the
greatest consequence, and Archer, instead of taking the means to secure a
judgment in his favour, was listening to the opinions of all his
companions. It was a prize which was to be won by his own exertions; but
he suffered himself to consider it as an affair of chance. The
consequence was, that he trusted to chance--his partisans lost their
wagers, and he the premium--and his temper. "Mr. Archer," said Dr. Middleton, after the grand affair was decided,
"you have done all that genius alone could do; but you, De Grey, have
done all that genius and industry united could do." "Well!" cried Archer, with affected gaiety, as soon as the doctor had
left the room--"Well, I'm content with MY sentence. Genius alone! for
me--industry for those who WANT it," added he, with a significant look at
De Grey. Fisher applauded this as a very spirited speech; and, by insinuations
that Dr. Middleton "always gave the premium to De Grey," and that "those
who had lost their bets might thank themselves for it, for being such
simpletons as to bet against the favourite," he raised a murmur highly
flattering to Archer, amongst some of the most credulous boys; whilst
others loudly proclaimed their belief in Dr. Middleton's impartiality. These warmly congratulated De Grey. At this Archer grew more and more
angry, and when Fisher was proceeding to speak nonsense FOR him, pushed
forward into the circle to De Grey, crying, "I wish, Mr. Fisher, you
would let me fight my own battles!" "And _I_ wish," said young Townsend, who was fonder of diversions than of
premiums, or battles, or of anything else--"_I_ wish, that we were not to
have any battles; after having worked like horses, don't set about to
fight like dogs. Come," said he, tapping De Grey's shoulder, "let us see
your new playhouse, do--it's a holiday, and let us make the most of it. Let us have the 'School for Scandal,' do; and I'll play Charles for you,
and you, De Grey, shall be MY LITTLE PREMIUM. Come, do open this new
playhouse of yours to-night." "Come then!" said De Grey, and he ran across the playground to a waste
building at the farthest end of it, in which, at the earnest request of
the whole community, and with the permission of Dr. Middleton, he had
with much pain and ingenuity erected a theatre. "The new theatre is going to be opened! Follow the manager! Follow the
manager!" echoed a multitude of voices. "FOLLOW THE MANAGER!" echoed very disagreeably in Archer's ear; but as he
could not be LEFT ALONE, he was also obliged to follow the manager. The
moment that the door was unlocked, the crowd rushed in:  the delight and
wonder expressed at the sight was great, and the applause and thanks
which were bestowed upon the manager were long and loud. Archer at least thought them long, for he was impatient till his voice
could be heard. When at length the acclamations had spent themselves, he
walked across the stage with a knowing air, and looking round
contemptuously. "And is THIS your famous playhouse?" cried he. "I wish you had, any of
you, seen the playhouse _I_ have been used to?" These words made a great and visible change in the feelings and opinions
of the public. "Who would be a servant of the public? or who would toil
for popular applause?" A few words spoken in a decisive tone by a new
voice operated as a charm, and the playhouse was in an instant
metamorphosed in the eyes of the spectators. All gratitude for the past
was forgotten, and the expectation of something better justified to the
capricious multitude their disdain of what they had so lately pronounced
to be excellent. Everyone now began to criticise. One observed, "that the green curtain
was full of holes, and would not draw up." Another attacked the scenes;
"Scenes! they were not like real scenes--Archer must know best, because
he was used to these things." So everybody crowded to hear something of
the OTHER playhouse. They gathered round Archer to hear the description
of his playhouse, and at every sentence insulting comparisons were made. When he had done, his auditors looked round, sighed and wished that
Archer had been their manager. They turned from De Grey as from a person
who had done them an injury. Some of his friends--for he had friends who
were not swayed by the popular opinion--felt indignation at this
ingratitude, and were going to express their feelings; but De Grey
stopped them, and begged that he might speak for himself. "Gentlemen," said he, coming forward, as soon as he felt that he had
sufficient command of himself. "My friends, I see you are discontented
with me and my playhouse. I have done my best to please you; but if
anybody else can please you better, I shall be glad of it. I did not
work so hard for the glory of being your manager. You have my free leave
to tear down--"  Here his voice faltered, but he hurried on--"You have my
free leave to tear down all my work as fast as you please. Archer, shake
hands first, however, to show that there's no malice in the case." Archer, who was touched by what his rival said, and, stopping the hand of
his new partisan, Fisher, cried, "No, Fisher! no!--no pulling down. We
can alter it. There is a great deal of ingenuity in it, considering." In vain Archer would now have recalled the public to reason,--the time
for reason was passed:  enthusiasm had taken hold of their minds. "Down
with it! Down with it! Archer for ever!" cried Fisher, and tore down
the curtain. The riot once begun, nothing could stop the little mob,
till the whole theatre was demolished. The love of power prevailed in
the mind of Archer; he was secretly flattered by the zeal of his PARTY,
and he mistook their love of mischief for attachment to himself. De Grey
looked on superior. "I said I could bear to see all this, and I can,"
said he; "now it is all over." And now it was all over, there was
silence. The rioters stood still to take breath, and to look at what
they had done. There was a blank space before them. In this moment of silence there was heard something like a voice. "Hush! What strange voice is that?" said Archer. Fisher caught fast hold of his
arm. Everybody looked round to see where the voice came from. It was
dusk. Two window-shutters at the farthest end of the building were seen
to move slowly inwards. De Grey, and in the same instant Archer, went
forward; and, as the shutters opened, there appeared through the hole the
dark face and shrivelled hands of a very old gipsy. She did not speak;
but she looked first at one and then at another. At length she fixed her
eyes on De Grey. "Well, woman," said he, "what do you want with me?" "Want!--nothing--with YOU," said the old woman; "do you want nothing with
ME?" "Nothing," said De Grey. Her eye immediately turned upon Archer,--"YOU
want something with me," said she, with emphasis. "I--what do I want?" replied Archer. "No," said she, changing her tone, "you want nothing--nothing will you
ever want, or I am much mistaken in that FACE." In that WATCH-CHAIN, she should have said, for her quick eye had espied
Archer's watch-chain. He was the only person in the company who had a
watch, and she therefore judged him to be the richest. "Had you ever your fortune told, sir, in your life?" "Not I!" said he, looking at De Grey, as if he was afraid of his
ridicule, if he listened to the gipsy. "Not you! No! for you will make your own fortune, and the fortune of all
that belong to you!" "There's good news for my friends!" cried Archer. "And I'm one of them, remember that," cried Fisher. "And I," "And I,"
joined a number of voices. "Good luck to them!" cried the gipsy, "good luck to them all!" Then, as soon as they had acquired sufficient confidence in her good
will, they pressed up to the window. "There," cried Townsend, as he
chanced to stumble over the carpenter's mitre box, which stood in the
way, "there's a good omen for me. I've stumbled on the mitre box; I
shall certainly be a bishop." Happy he who had sixpence, for he bid fair to be a judge upon the bench. And happier he who had a shilling, for he was in the high road to be one
day upon the woolsack, Lord High Chancellor of England. No one had half
a crown, or no one would surely have kept it in his pocket upon such an
occasion, for he might have been an archbishop, a king, or what he
pleased. Fisher, who like all weak people was extremely credulous, kept his post
immovable in the front row all the time, his mouth open, and his stupid
eyes fixed upon the gipsy, in whom he felt implicit faith. Those who have least confidence in their own powers, and who have least
expectation from the success of their own exertions, are always most
disposed to trust in fortune-tellers and fortune. They hope to WIN, when
they cannot EARN; and as they can never be convinced by those who speak
sense, it is no wonder they are always persuaded by those who talk
nonsense. "I have a question to put," said Fisher, in a solemn tone. "Put it, then," said Archer, "what hinders you?" "But they will hear me," said he, looking suspiciously at De Grey. "_I_ shall not hear you," said De Grey, "I am going." Everybody else
drew back, and left him to whisper his question in the gipsy's ear. "What is become of my Livy?" "Your SISTER Livy, do you mean?" said the gipsy. "No, my LATIN Livy." The gipsy paused for information. "It had a leaf torn out in the
beginning, and I HATE DR. MIDDLETON--"

"Written in it," interrupted the gipsy. "Right--the very book!" cried Fisher with joy. "But how COULD you know
it was Dr. Middleton's name? I thought I had scratched it, so that
nobody could make it out." "Nobody COULD make it out but ME," replied the gipsy. "But never think
to deceive me," said she, shaking her head at him in a manner that made
him tremble. "I don't deceive you indeed, I tell you the whole truth. I lost it a
week ago." "True." "And when shall I find it?" "Meet me here at this hour to-morrow evening, and I will answer you. No
more! I must be gone. Not a word more to-night." She pulled the shutters towards her, and left the youth in darkness. All
his companions were gone. He had been so deeply engaged in this
conference, that he had not perceived their departure. He found all the
world at supper, but no entreaties could prevail upon him to disclose his
secret. Townsend rallied in vain. As for Archer, he was not disposed to
destroy by ridicule the effect which he saw that the old woman's
predictions in his favour had had upon the imagination of many of his
little partisans. He had privately slipped two good shillings into the
gipsy's hand to secure her; for he was willing to pay any price for ANY
means of acquiring power. The watch-chain had not deceived the gipsy, for Archer was the richest
person in the community. His friends had imprudently supplied him with
more money than is usually trusted to boys of his age. Dr. Middleton had
refused to give him a larger monthly allowance than the rest of his
companions; but he brought to school with him secretly the sum of five
guineas. This appeared to his friends and to himself an inexhaustible
treasure. Riches and talents would, he flattered himself, secure to him that
ascendancy of which he was so ambitious. "Am I your manager, or not?" was now his question. "I scorn to take advantage of a hasty moment; but
since last night you have had time to consider. If you desire me to be
your manager, you shall see what a theatre I will make for you. In this
purse," said he, showing through the network a glimpse of the shining
treasure--"in this purse is Aladdin's wonderful lamp. Am I your manager? Put it to the vote." It was put to the vote. About ten of the most reasonable of the assembly
declared their gratitude and high approbation of their old friend, De
Grey; but the numbers were in favour of the new friend. And as no
metaphysical distinctions relative to the idea of a majority had ever
entered their thoughts, the most numerous party considered themselves as
now beyond dispute in the right. They drew off on one side in triumph,
and their leader, who knew the consequence of a name in party matters,
immediately distinguished his partisans by the gallant name of ARCHERS,
stigmatizing the friends of De Grey by the odious epithet of Greybeards. Amongst the Archers was a class not very remarkable for their mental
qualifications; but who, by their bodily activity, and by the peculiar
advantages annexed to their way of life, rendered themselves of the
highest consequence, especially to the rich and enterprising. The judicious reader will apprehend that I allude to the persons called
day scholars. Amongst these, Fisher was distinguished by his knowledge
of all the streets and shops in the adjacent town; and, though a dull
scholar, he had such reputation as a man of business, that whoever had
commissions to execute at the confectioner's, was sure to apply to him. Some of the youngest of his employers had, it is true, at times
complained that he made mistakes of halfpence and pence in their
accounts; but as these affairs could never be brought to a public trial,
Fisher's character and consequence were undiminished, till the fatal day
when his Aunt Barbara forbade his visits to the confectioner's; or,
rather, till she requested the confectioner, who had his private reasons
for obeying her, not TO RECEIVE her nephew's visits, as he had made
himself sick at his house, and Mrs. Barbara's fears for his health were
incessant. Though his visits to the confectioner's were thus at an end, there were
many other shops open to him; and with officious zeal he offered his
services to the new manager, to purchase whatever might be wanting for
the theatre. Since his father's death Fisher had become a boarder at Dr. Middleton's,
but his frequent visits to his Aunt Barbara afforded him opportunities of
going into the town. The carpenter, De Grey's friend, was discarded by
Archer, for having said "LACK-A-DAISY!" when he saw that the old theatre
was pulled down. A new carpenter and paper hanger, recommended by
Fisher, were appointed to attend, with their tools, for orders, at two
o'clock. Archer, impatient to show his ingenuity and his generosity,
gave his plan and his orders in a few minutes, in a most decided manner;
"These things," he observed, "should be done with some spirit." To which the carpenter readily assented, and added, that "gentlemen of
spirit never looked to the EXPENSE, but always to the EFFECT." Upon this
principle Mr. Chip set to work with all possible alacrity. In a few
hours' time he promised to produce a grand effect. High expectations
were formed. Nothing was talked of but the new playhouse; and so intent
upon it was every head, that no lessons could be got. Archer was
obliged, in the midst of his various occupations, to perform the part of
grammar and dictionary for twenty different people. "O ye Athenians!" he exclaimed, "how hard do I work to obtain your
praise!" Impatient to return to the theatre, the moment the hours destined for
instruction, or, as they are termed by schoolboys, school-hours, were
over, each prisoner started up with a shout of joy. "Stop one moment, gentlemen, if you please," said Dr. Middleton, in an
awful voice. "Mr. Archer, return to your place. Are you all here?" The
names of all the boys were called over, and when each had answered to his
name, Dr. Middleton said--

"Gentlemen, I am sorry to interrupt your amusements; but, till you have
contrary orders from me, no one, on pain of my serious displeasure, must
go into THAT building" (pointing to the place where the theatre was
erecting). "Mr. Archer, your carpenter is at the door. You will be so
good as to dismiss him. I do not think proper to give my reasons for
these orders; but you who KNOW me," said the doctor, and his eye turned
towards De Grey, "will not suspect me of caprice. I depend, gentlemen,
upon your obedience." To the dead silence with which these orders were received, succeeded in a
few minutes a universal groan. "So!" said Townsend, "all our diversion
is over." "So," whispered Fisher in the manager's ear, "this is some
trick of the Greybeard's. Did you not observe how he looked at De Grey?" Fired by this thought, which had never entered his mind before, Archer
started from his reverie, and striking his hand upon the table, swore
that he "would not be outwitted by any Greybeard in Europe--no, nor by
all of them put together. The Archers were surely a match for them. He
would stand by them, if they would stand by him," he declared, with a
loud voice, "against the whole world, and Dr. Middleton himself, with
'LITTLE PREMIUMS' at his right hand." Everybody admired Archer's spirit, but were a little appalled at the
sound of standing against Dr. Middleton. "Why not?" resumed the indignant manager. "Neither Dr. Middleton nor any
doctor upon earth shall treat me with injustice. This, you see, is a
stroke at me and my party, and I won't bear it." "Oh, you are mistaken!" said De Grey, who was the only one who dared to
oppose reason to the angry orator. "It cannot be a stroke aimed at 'you
and your party,' for he does not know that you HAVE a party." "I'll make him know it, and I'll make YOU know it, too," said Archer. "Before I came here you reigned alone, now your reign is over, Mr. De
Grey. Remember my majority this morning, and your theatre last night." "He has remembered it," said Fisher. "You see, the moment he was not to
be our manager, we were to have no theatre, no playhouse, no plays. We
must all sit down with our hands before us--all for 'GOOD REASONS' of Dr.
Middleton's, which he does not vouchsafe to tell us." "I won't be governed by any man's reasons that he won't tell me," cried
Archer. "He cannot have good reasons, or why not tell them?" "Nonsense!" said De Grey. "WE SHALL NOT SUSPECT HIM OF CAPRICE!" "Why not?" "Because we who know him, have never known him capricious." "Perhaps not. _I_ know nothing about him," said Archer. "No," said De Grey; "for that very reason _I_ speak who do know him. Don't be in a passion, Archer." "I will be in a passion. I won't submit to tyranny. I won't be made a
fool of by a few soft words. You don't know me, De Grey. I'll go
through with what I've begun. I am manager, and I will be manager; and
you shall see my theatre finished in spite of you, and MY party
triumphant." "Party," repeated De Grey. "I cannot imagine what is in the word 'party'
that seems to drive you mad. We never heard of parties till you came
amongst us." "No; before I came, I say, nobody dared oppose you; but I dare; and I
tell you to your face, take care of me--a warm friend and a bitter enemy
is my motto." "I am not your enemy! I believe you are out of your senses, Archer!" said he, laughing. "Out of my senses! No; you are my enemy! Are you not my rival? Did not
you win the premium? Did not you want to be manager? Answer me, are not
you, in one word, a Greybeard?" "You called me a Greybeard, but my name is De Grey," said he, still
laughing. "Laugh on!" cried the other, furiously. "Come, ARCHERS, follow me. WE
shall laugh by-and-by, I promise you." At the door Archer was stopped by
Mr. Chip. "Oh, Mr. Chip, I am ordered to discharge you." "Yes, sir; and here's a little bill--"

"Bill, Mr. Chip! why, you have not been at work for two hours!" "Not much over, sir; but if you'll please to look into it, you'll see
'tis for a few things you ordered. The stuff is all laid out and
delivered. The paper and the festoon-bordering for the drawing room
scene is cut out, and left yAnder within." "YAnder, within! I wish you had not been in such a confounded hurry--
six-and-twenty shillings!" cried he; "but I can't stay to talk about it
now. I'll tell you, Mr. Chip," said Archer, lowering his voice, "what
you must do for me, my good fellow." Then, drawing Mr. Chip aside, he begged him to pull down some of the wood
work which had been put up, and to cut it into a certain number of wooden
bars, of which he gave him the dimensions, with orders to place them all,
when ready, under a haystack, which he pointed out. Mr. Chip scrupled and hesitated, and began to talk of "THE DOCTOR." Archer immediately began to talk of the bill, and throwing down a guinea
and a half, the conscientious carpenter pocketed the money directly, and
made his bow. "Well, Master Archer," said he, "there's no refusing you nothing. You
have such a way of talking one out of it. You manage me just like a
child." "Ay, ay!" said Archer, knowing that he had been cheated, and yet proud of
managing a carpenter, "ay, ay! I know the way to manage everybody. Let
the things be ready in an hour's time, and hark'e! leave your tools by
mistake behind you, and a thousand of twenty-penny nails. Ask no
questions, and keep your own counsel like a wise man. Off with you, and
take care of 'THE DOCTOR.'" "Archers, Archers, to the Archers' tree! Follow your leader," cried he,
sounding his well known whistle as a signal. His followers gathered
round him, and he, raising himself upon the mount at the foot of the
tree, counted his numbers, and then, in a voice lower than usual,
addressed them thus:--"My friends, is there a Greybeard amongst us? If
there is, let him walk off at once, he has my free leave." No one
stirred. "Then we are all Archers, and we will stand by one another. Join hands, my friends." They all joined hands. "Promise me not to
betray me, and I will go on. I ask no security but your honour." They
all gave their honour to be secret and FAITHFUL, as he called it, and he
went on. "Did you ever hear of such a thing as a 'BARRING OUT,' my
friends?" They had heard of such a thing, but they had only heard of it. Archer gave the history of a "Barring Out," in which he had been
concerned at his school, in which the boys stood out against the master,
and gained their point at last, which was a week's more holidays at
Easter. *  "But if WE should not succeed," said they, "Dr.  Middleton is
so steady; he never goes back from what he has said." "Did you ever try to push him back? Let us be steady and he'll tremble. Tyrants always tremble when--"

"Oh," interrupted a number of voices; "but he is not a tyrant--is he?" "All schoolmasters are tyrants--are not they?" replied Archer; "and is
not he a schoolmaster?" To this logic there was no answer; but, still reluctant, they asked,
"What they should GET by a Barring Out?" "Get!--everything!--what we want!--which is everything to lads of spirit-
-victory and liberty! Bar him out till he repeals his tyrannical law;
till he lets us into our own theatre again, or till he tells us his 'GOOD
REASONS' against it." "But perhaps he has reasons for not telling us." "Impossible!" cried Archer, "that's the way we are always to be governed
by a man in a wig, who says he has good reasons, and can't tell them. Are you fools? Go! go back to De Grey! I see you are all Greybeards. Go! Who goes first?" Nobody would go FIRST. "I will have nothing to do
with ye, if ye are resolved to be slaves!" "We won't be slaves!" they
all exclaimed at once. "Then," said Archer, "stand out in the right and
be free." *[This custom of "BARRING OUT" was very general (especially in the
northern parts of England) during the 17th and 18th centuries, and it has
been fully described by Brand and other antiquarian writers. Dr. Johnson mentions that Addison, while under the tuition of Mr. Shaw,
master of the Lichfield Grammar School, led, and successfully conducted,
"a plan for BARRING OUT his master. A disorderly privilege," says the
doctor, "which, in his time, prevailed in the principal seminaries of
education." In the Gentleman's Magazine of 1828, Dr. P. A. Nuttall, under the
signature of II. A. N., has given a spirited sketch of a "BARRING OUT" at
the Ormskirk Grammar School, which has since been republished at length
(though without acknowledgment), by Sir Henry Ellis, in Bohn's recent
edition of Brand's "Popular Antiquities." This operation took place
early in the present century, and is interesting from its being, perhaps,
the last attempt on record, and also from the circumstance of the writer
himself having been one of the juvenile leaders in the daring adventure,
"quo rum pars magna fuit,"--Ed.] "THE RIGHT." It would have taken up too much time to examine what "THE
RIGHT" was. Archer was always sure that "THE RIGHT" was what his party
chose to do; that is, what he chose to do himself; and such is the
influence of numbers upon each other, in conquering the feelings of shame
and in confusing the powers of reasoning, that in a few minutes "the
right" was forgotten, and each said to himself, "To be sure, Archer is a
very clever boy, and he can't be mistaken"; or, "to be sure, Townsend
thinks so, and he would not do anything to get us into a scrape"; or, "to
be sure, everybody will agree to this but myself, and I can't stand out
alone, to be pointed at as a Greybeard and a slave. Everybody thinks it
is right, and everybody can't be wrong." By some of these arguments, which passed rapidly through the mind without
his being conscious of them, each boy decided, and deceived himself--what
none would have done alone, none scrupled to do as a party. It was
determined, then, that there should be a Barring Out. The arrangement of
the affair was left to their new manager, to whom they all pledged
implicit obedience. Obedience, it seems, is necessary, even from rebels
to their ringleaders; not reasonable, but implicit obedience. Scarcely had the assembly adjourned to the Ball-alley, when Fisher, with
an important length of face, came up to the manager, and desired to speak
one word to him. "My advice to you, Archer, is, to do nothing in this
till we have consulted, YOU KNOW WHO, about whether it's right or wrong." "'YOU KNOW WHO!' Whom do you mean? Make haste, and don't make so many
faces, for I'm in a hurry. Who is 'YOU KNOW WHO?'" "The old woman," said Fisher, gravely; "the gipsy." "You may consult the old woman," said Archer, bursting out a-laughing,
"about what's right and wrong, if you please; but no old woman shall
decide for me."