In the southern clime,
 Where the summer's prime
 Never fades away,
 Lovely Lyca lay. Seven summers old
 Lovely Lyca told. She had wandered long,
 Hearing wild birds' song. "Sweet sleep, come to me
 Underneath this tree;
 Do father, mother, weep? Where can Lyca sleep? "Lost in desert wild
 Is your little child. How can Lyca sleep
 If her mother weep? "If her heart does ache,
 Then let Lyca wake;
 If my mother sleep,
 Lyca shall not weep. "Frowning, frowning night,
 O'er this desert bright
 Let thy moon arise,
 While I close my eyes." Sleeping Lyca lay
 While the beasts of prey,
 Come from caverns deep,
 Viewed the maid asleep. The kingly lion stood,
 And the virgin viewed:
 Then he gambolled round
 O'er the hallowed ground. Leopards, tigers, play
 Round her as she lay;
 While the lion old
 Bowed his mane of gold,
 
 And her breast did lick
 And upon her neck,
 From his eyes of flame,
 Ruby tears there came;
 
 While the lioness
 Loosed her slender dress,
 And naked they conveyed
 To caves the sleeping maid. THE LITTLE GIRL FOUND
 
 All the night in woe
 Lyca's parents go
 Over valleys deep,
 While the deserts weep. Tired and woe-begone,
 Hoarse with making moan,
 Arm in arm, seven days
 They traced the desert ways. Seven nights they sleep
 Among shadows deep,
 And dream they see their child
 Starved in desert wild. Pale through pathless ways
 The fancied image strays,
 Famished, weeping, weak,
 With hollow piteous shriek. Rising from unrest,
 The trembling woman presse
 With feet of weary woe;
 She could no further go. In his arms he bore
 Her, armed with sorrow sore;
 Till before their way
 A couching lion lay. Turning back was vain:
 Soon his heavy mane
 Bore them to the ground,
 Then he stalked around,
 
 Smelling to his prey;
 But their fears allay
 When he licks their hands,
 And silent by them stands. They look upon his eyes,
 Filled with deep surprise;
 And wondering behold
 A spirit armed in gold. On his head a crown,
 On his shoulders down
 Flowed his golden hair. Gone was all their care. "Follow me," he said;
 "Weep not for the maid;
 In my palace deep,
 Lyca lies asleep." Then they followed
 Where the vision led,
 And saw their sleeping child
 Among tigers wild. To this day they dwell
 In a lonely dell,
 Nor fear the wolvish howl
 Nor the lion's growl. THE CHIMNEY SWEEPER
 
 A little black thing in the snow,
 Crying "weep! weep!" in notes of woe! "Where are thy father and mother? Say!" --
 "They are both gone up to the church to pray. "Because I was happy upon the heath,
 And smiled among the winter's snow,
 They clothed me in the clothes of death,
 And taught me to sing the notes of woe. "And because I am happy and dance and sing,
 They think they have done me no injury,
 And are gone to praise God and his priest and king,
 Who make up a heaven of our misery." NURSE'S SONG
 
 When voices of children are heard on the green,
 And whisperings are in the dale,
 The days of my youth rise fresh in my mind,
 My face turns green and pale. Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down,
 And the dews of night arise;
 Your spring and your day are wasted in play,
 And your winter and night in disguise. THE SICK ROSE
 
 O rose, thou art sick! The invisible worm,
 That flies in the night,
   In the howling storm,
 
 Has found out thy bed
   Of crimson joy,
 And his dark secret love
   Does thy life destroy. THE FLY
 
 Little Fly,
 Thy summer's play
 My thoughtless hand
 Has brushed away. Am not I
 A fly like thee? Or art not thou
 A man like me? For I dance
 And drink, and sing,
 Till some blind hand
 Shall brush my wing. If thought is life
 And strength and breath
 And the want 
 Of thought is death;
 
 Then am I
 A happy fly,
 If I live,
 Or if I die. THE ANGEL
 
 I dreamt a dream! What can it mean? And that I was a maiden Queen
 Guarded by an Angel mild:
 Witless woe was ne'er beguiled! And I wept both night and day,
 And he wiped my tears away;
 And I wept both day and night,
 And hid from him my heart's delight. So he took his wings, and fled;
 Then the morn blushed rosy red. I dried my tears, and armed my fears
 With ten-thousand shields and spears. Soon my Angel came again;
 I was armed, he came in vain;
 For the time of youth was fled,
 And grey hairs were on my head. THE TIGER
 
 Tiger, tiger, burning bright
 In the forest of the night,
 What immortal hand or eye
 Could Frame thy fearful symmetry? In what distant deeps or skies
 Burnt the fire of thine eyes? On what wings dare he aspire? What the hand dare seize the fire? And what shoulder and what art
 Could twist the sinews of thy heart? And, when thy heart began to beat,
 What dread hand and what dread feet? What the hammer? what the chain? In what furnace was thy brain? What the anvil? what dread grasp
 Dare its deadly terrors clasp? When the stars threw down their spears,
 And watered heaven with their tears,
 Did he smile his work to see? Did he who made the lamb make thee? Tiger, tiger, burning bright
 In the forests of the night,
 What immortal hand or eye
 Dare frame thy fearful symmetry? MY PRETTY ROSE TREE
 
 A flower was offered to me,
   Such a flower as May never bore;
 But I said "I've a pretty rose tree,"
   And I passed the sweet flower o'er. Then I went to my pretty rose tree,
   To tend her by day and by night;
 But my rose turned away with jealousy,
   And her thorns were my only delight. AH SUNFLOWER
 
 Ah Sunflower, weary of time,
   Who countest the steps of the sun;
 Seeking after that sweet golden clime
   Where the traveller's journey is done;
 
 Where the Youth pined away with desire,
   And the pale virgin shrouded in snow,
 Arise from their graves, and aspire
   Where my Sunflower wishes to go! THE LILY
 
 The modest Rose puts forth a thorn,
 The humble sheep a threat'ning horn:
 While the Lily white shall in love delight,
 Nor a thorn nor a threat stain her beauty bright. THE GARDEN OF LOVE
 
 I laid me down upon a bank,
   Where Love lay sleeping;
 I heard among the rushes dank
   Weeping, weeping. Then I went to the heath and the wild,
   To the thistles and thorns of the waste;
 And they told me how they were beguiled,
   Driven out, and compelled to the chaste. I went to the Garden of Love,
   And saw what I never had seen;
 A Chapel was built in the midst,
   Where I used to play on the green. And the gates of this Chapel were shut
   And "Thou shalt not," writ over the door;
 So I turned to the Garden of Love
   That so many sweet flowers bore. And I saw it was filled with graves,
   And tombstones where flowers should be;
 And priests in black gowns were walking their rounds,
   And binding with briars my joys and desires. THE LITTLE VAGABOND
 
 Dear mother, dear mother, the Church is cold;
 But the Alehouse is healthy, and pleasant, and warm. Besides, I can tell where I am used well;
 The poor parsons with wind like a blown bladder swell. But, if at the Church they would give us some ale,
 And a pleasant fire our souls to regale,
 We'd sing and we'd pray all the livelong day,
 Nor ever once wish from the Church to stray. Then the Parson might preach, and drink, and sing,
 And we'd be as happy as birds in the spring;
 And modest Dame Lurch, who is always at church,
 Would not have bandy children, nor fasting, nor birch. And God, like a father, rejoicing to see
 His children as pleasant and happy as he,
 Would have no more quarrel with the Devil or the barrel,
 But kiss him, and give him both drink and apparel. LONDON
 
 I wandered through each chartered street,
   Near where the chartered Thames does flow,
 A mark in every face I meet,
   Marks of weakness, marks of woe. In every cry of every man,
   In every infant's cry of fear,
 In every voice, in every ban,
   The mind-forged manacles I hear:
 
 How the chimney-sweeper's cry
   Every blackening church appals,
 And the hapless soldier's sigh
   Runs in blood down palace-walls. But most, through midnight streets I hear
   How the youthful harlot's curse
 Blasts the new-born infant's tear,
   And blights with plagues the marriage-hearse. THE HUMAN ABSTRACT
 
 Pity would be no more
 If we did not make somebody poor,
 And Mercy no more could be
 If all were as happy as we. And mutual fear brings Peace,
 Till the selfish loves increase
 Then Cruelty knits a snare,
 And spreads his baits with care. He sits down with his holy fears,
 And waters the ground with tears;
 Then Humility takes its root
 Underneath his foot. Soon spreads the dismal shade
 Of Mystery over his head,
 And the caterpillar and fly
 Feed on the Mystery. And it bears the fruit of Deceit,
 Ruddy and sweet to eat,
 And the raven his nest has made
 In its thickest shade. The gods of the earth and sea
 Sought through nature to find this tree,
 But their search was all in vain:
 There grows one in the human Brain. INFANT SORROW
 
 My mother groaned, my father wept:
 Into the dangerous world I leapt,
 Helpless, naked, piping loud,
 Like a fiend hid in a cloud. Struggling in my father's hands,
 Striving against my swaddling-bands,
 Bound and weary, I thought best
 To sulk upon my mother's breast. A POISON TREE
 
 I was angry with my friend:
 I told my wrath, my wrath did end. I was angry with my foe:
 I told it not, my wrath did grow. And I watered it in fears
 Night and morning with my tears,
 And I sunned it with smiles
 And with soft deceitful wiles. And it grew both day and night,
 Till it bore an apple bright,
 And my foe beheld it shine,
 and he knew that it was mine, --
 
 And into my garden stole
 When the night had veiled the pole;
 In the morning, glad, I see
 My foe outstretched beneath the tree. A LITTLE BOY LOST
 
 "Nought loves another as itself,
   Nor venerates another so,
 Nor is it possible to thought
   A greater than itself to know. "And, father, how can I love you 
   Or any of my brothers more? I love you like the little bird
   That picks up crumbs around the door." The Priest sat by and heard the child;
   In trembling zeal he seized his hair,
 He led him by his little coat,
   And all admired the priestly care. And standing on the altar high,
   "Lo, what a fiend is here! said he:
 "One who sets reason up for judge
   Of our most holy mystery." The weeping child could not be heard,
   The weeping parents wept in vain:
 They stripped him to his little shirt,
   And bound him in an iron chain,
 
 And burned him in a holy place
   Where many had been burned before;
 The weeping parents wept in vain. Are such thing done on Albion's shore?