Almost as he spoke the hedges were broken all along the ridge
by a rush of the escaping brigands. They dived into bushes
and thick grass like defeated men pursued; and the great cocked hats
of the mounted gendarmerie were seen passing along above the broken hedge. Another order was given; there was a noise of dismounting,
and a tall officer with cocked hat, a grey imperial, and a paper in his hand
appeared in the gap that was the gate of the Paradise of Thieves. There was a momentary silence, broken in an extraordinary way by the banker,
who cried out in a hoarse and strangled voice: "Robbed! I've been robbed!" "Why, that was hours ago," cried his son in astonishment:
"when you were robbed of two thousand pounds." "Not of two thousand pounds," said the financier, with an abrupt
and terrible composure, "only of a small bottle." The policeman with the grey imperial was striding across
the green hollow. Encountering the King of the Thieves in his path,
he clapped him on the shoulder with something between a caress
and a buffet and gave him a push that sent him staggering away. "You'll get into trouble, too," he said, "if you play these tricks." Again to Muscari's artistic eye it seemed scarcely like
the capture of a great outlaw at bay. Passing on, the policeman halted
before the Harrogate group and said:  "Samuel Harrogate, I arrest you
in the name of the law for embezzlement of the funds of the Hull and
Huddersfield Bank." The great banker nodded with an odd air of business assent,
seemed to reflect a moment, and before they could interpose took
a half turn and a step that brought him to the edge of the outer
mountain wall. Then, flinging up his hands, he leapt exactly as he leapt
out of the coach. But this time he did not fall into a little meadow
just beneath; he fell a thousand feet below, to become a wreck of bones
in the valley. The anger of the Italian policeman, which he expressed volubly
to Father Brown, was largely mixed with admiration. "It was like him
to escape us at last," he said. "He was a great brigand if you like. This last trick of his I believe to be absolutely unprecedented. He fled with the company's money to Italy, and actually got himself
captured by sham brigands in his own pay, so as to explain both the
disappearance of the money and the disappearance of himself. That demand for ransom was really taken seriously by most of the police. But for years he's been doing things as good as that, quite as good
as that. He will be a serious loss to his family." Muscari was leading away the unhappy daughter, who held hard to him,
as she did for many a year after. But even in that tragic wreck
he could not help having a smile and a hand of half-mocking friendship
for the indefensible Ezza Montano. "And where are you going next?" he asked him over his shoulder. "Birmingham," answered the actor, puffing a cigarette. "Didn't I tell you I was a Futurist? I really do believe in those things
if I believe in anything. Change, bustle and new things every morning. I am going to Manchester, Liverpool, Leeds, Hull, Huddersfield,
Glasgow, Chicago--in short, to enlightened, energetic, civilized society!" "In short," said Muscari, "to the real Paradise of Thieves." III. The Duel of Dr Hirsch


M. MAURICE BRUN and M. Armand Armagnac were crossing the sunlit
Champs Elysee with a kind of vivacious respectability. They were both short, brisk and bold. They both had black beards
that did not seem to belong to their faces, after the strange French fashion
which makes real hair look like artificial. M. Brun had
a dark wedge of beard apparently affixed under his lower lip. M. Armagnac, by way of a change, had two beards; one sticking out
from each corner of his emphatic chin. They were both young. They were both atheists, with a depressing fixity of outlook
but great mobility of exposition. They were both pupils of
the great Dr Hirsch, scientist, publicist and moralist. M. Brun had become prominent by his proposal that the common
expression "Adieu" should be obliterated from all the French classics,
and a slight fine imposed for its use in private life. "Then," he said,
"the very name of your imagined God will have echoed for the last time
in the ear of man." M. Armagnac specialized rather in a resistance
to militarism, and wished the chorus of the Marseillaise altered from
"Aux armes, citoyens" to "Aux greves, citoyens". But his antimilitarism
was of a peculiar and Gallic sort. An eminent and very wealthy
English Quaker, who had come to see him to arrange for the disarmament
of the whole planet, was rather distressed by Armagnac's proposal
that (by way of beginning) the soldiers should shoot their officers. And indeed it was in this regard that the two men differed most
from their leader and father in philosophy. Dr Hirsch,
though born in France and covered with the most triumphant favours
of French education, was temperamentally of another type--mild, dreamy,
humane; and, despite his sceptical system, not devoid of transcendentalism. He was, in short, more like a German than a Frenchman; and much as they
admired him, something in the subconsciousness of these Gauls was
irritated at his pleading for peace in so peaceful a manner. To their party throughout Europe, however, Paul Hirsch was
a saint of science. His large and daring cosmic theories
advertised his austere life and innocent, if somewhat frigid, morality;
he held something of the position of Darwin doubled with the position
of Tolstoy. But he was neither an anarchist nor an antipatriot;
his views on disarmament were moderate and evolutionary--
the Republican Government put considerable confidence in him
as to various chemical improvements. He had lately even discovered
a noiseless explosive, the secret of which the Government was
carefully guarding. His house stood in a handsome street near the Elysee--
a street which in that strong summer seemed almost as full of foliage
as the park itself; a row of chestnuts shattered the sunshine,
interrupted only in one place where a large cafe ran out into the street. Almost opposite to this were the white and green blinds of
the great scientist's house, an iron balcony, also painted green,
running along in front of the first-floor windows. Beneath this was
the entrance into a kind of court, gay with shrubs and tiles,
into which the two Frenchmen passed in animated talk. The door was opened to them by the doctor's old servant, Simon,
who might very well have passed for a doctor himself, having a strict
suit of black, spectacles, grey hair, and a confidential manner. In fact, he was a far more presentable man of science than his master,
Dr Hirsch, who was a forked radish of a fellow, with just enough
bulb of a head to make his body insignificant. With all the gravity
of a great physician handling a prescription, Simon handed a letter
to M. Armagnac. That gentleman ripped it up with a racial impatience,
and rapidly read the following:

     I cannot come down to speak to you. There is a man in this house
whom I refuse to meet. He is a Chauvinist officer, Dubosc. He is sitting on the stairs. He has been kicking the furniture about
in all the other rooms; I have locked myself in my study,
opposite that cafe. If you love me, go over to the cafe and wait
at one of the tables outside. I will try to send him over to you. I want you to answer him and deal with him. I cannot meet him myself. I cannot: I will not. There is going to be another Dreyfus case. P. HIRSCH



     M. Armagnac looked at M. Brun. M. Brun borrowed the letter,
read it, and looked at M. Armagnac. Then both betook themselves briskly
to one of the little tables under the chestnuts opposite,
where they procured two tall glasses of horrible green absinthe,
which they could drink apparently in any weather and at any time. Otherwise the cafe seemed empty, except for one soldier drinking coffee
at one table, and at another a large man drinking a small syrup and
a priest drinking nothing. Maurice Brun cleared his throat and said:  "Of course we must help
the master in every way, but--"

     There was an abrupt silence, and Armagnac said:  "He may have
excellent reasons for not meeting the man himself, but--"

     Before either could complete a sentence, it was evident that
the invader had been expelled from the house opposite. The shrubs under
the archway swayed and burst apart, as that unwelcome guest was
shot out of them like a cannon-ball. He was a sturdy figure in a small and tilted Tyrolean felt hat,
a figure that had indeed something generally Tyrolean about it. The man's shoulders were big and broad, but his legs were neat and active
in knee-breeches and knitted stockings. His face was brown like a nut;
he had very bright and restless brown eyes; his dark hair was brushed back
stiffly in front and cropped close behind, outlining a square and
powerful skull; and he had a huge black moustache like the horns of a bison. Such a substantial head is generally based on a bull neck; but this was
hidden by a big coloured scarf, swathed round up the man's ears
and falling in front inside his jacket like a sort of fancy waistcoat. It was a scarf of strong dead colours, dark red and old gold and purple,
probably of Oriental fabrication. Altogether the man had something
a shade barbaric about him; more like a Hungarian squire than
an ordinary French officer. His French, however, was obviously
that of a native; and his French patriotism was so impulsive
as to be slightly absurd. His first act when he burst out of the archway
was to call in a clarion voice down the street:  "Are there any
Frenchmen here?" as if he were calling for Christians in Mecca. Armagnac and Brun instantly stood up; but they were too late. Men were already running from the street corners; there was a small
but ever-clustering crowd. With the prompt French instinct for
the politics of the street, the man with the black moustache had already
run across to a corner of the cafe, sprung on one of the tables,
and seizing a branch of chestnut to steady himself, shouted
as Camille Desmoulins once shouted when he scattered the oak-leaves
among the populace. "Frenchmen!" he volleyed; "I cannot speak! God help me, that is why
I am speaking! The fellows in their filthy parliaments who learn
to speak also learn to be silent--silent as that spy cowering
in the house opposite! Silent as he is when I beat on his bedroom door! Silent as he is now, though he hears my voice across this street
and shakes where he sits! Oh, they can be silent eloquently--
the politicians! But the time has come when we that cannot speak
must speak. You are betrayed to the Prussians. Betrayed at this moment. Betrayed by that man.