Amongst them was our old blind friend, who, as he was not so
well clad as his competitors, seemed to be disdained by many of the
spectators. Six ladies and six gentlemen were now appointed to be judges
of the performance. They were seated in a semicircle, opposite to the
harpers. The Miss Somerses, who were fond of music, were amongst the
ladies in the semicircle; and the prize was lodged in the hands of Sir
Arthur. There was now silence. The first harp sounded, and as each
musician tried his skill, the audience seemed to think that each deserved
the prize. The old blind man was the last. He tuned his instrument; and
such a simple, pathetic strain was heard as touched every heart. All
were fixed in delighted attention; and when the music ceased, the silence
for some moments continued. The silence was followed by a universal buzz of applause. The judges
were unanimous in their opinions, and it was declared that the old blind
harper, who played the last, deserved the prize. The simple, pathetic air which won the suffrages of the whole assembly,
was his own composition. He was pressed to give the words belonging to
the music; and at last he modestly offered to repeat them, as he could
not see to write. Miss Somers' ready pencil was instantly produced; and
the old harper dictated the words of his ballad, which he called--
"Susan's Lamentation for her Lamb." Miss Somers looked at her brother from time to time, as she wrote; and
Sir Arthur, as soon as the old man had finished, took him aside, and
asked him some questions, which brought the whole history of Susan's lamb
and of Attorney Case's cruelty to light. The attorney himself was present when the harper began to dictate his
ballad. His colour, as Sir Arthur steadily looked at him, varied
continually; till at length, when he heard the words "Susan's Lamentation
for her Lamb," he suddenly shrunk back, skulked through the crowd, and
disappeared. We shall not follow him; we had rather follow our old
friend, the victorious harper. No sooner had he received the ten guineas, his well merited prize, than
he retired to a small room belonging to the people of the house, asked
for pen, ink and paper, and dictated, in a low voice, to his boy, who was
a tolerably good scribe, a letter, which he ordered him to put directly
into the Shrewsbury post-office. The boy ran with the letter to the
post-office. He was but just in time, for the postman's horn was
sounding. The next morning, when Farmer Price, his wife, and Susan, were sitting
together, reflecting that his week's leave of absence was nearly at an
end, and that the money was not yet made up for John Simpson, the
substitute, a knock was heard at the door, and the person who usually
delivered the letters in the village put a letter into Susan's hand,
saying, "A penny, if you please--here's a letter for your father." "For me!" said Farmer Price; "here's the penny then, but who can it be
from, I wonder? Who can think of writing to me, in this world?" He tore
open the letter; but the hard name at the bottom of the page puzzled him-
-"your obliged friend, Llewellyn." "And what's this?" said he, opening a paper that was inclosed in the
letter. "It's a song, seemingly; it must be somebody that has a mind to
make an April fool of me." "But it is not April, it is May, father," said Susan. "Well, let us read the letter, and we shall come to the truth all in good
time." Farmer Price sat down in his own chair, for he could not read entirely to
his satisfaction in any other, and read as follows:--

"MY WORTHY FRIEND,--I am sure you will be glad to hear that I have had
good success this night. I have won the ten guinea prize, and for that I
am in a great measure indebted to your sweet daughter Susan; as you will
see by a little ballad I inclose for her. Your hospitality to me has
afforded to me an opportunity of learning some of your family history. You do not, I hope, forget that I was present when you were counting the
treasure in Susan's little purse, and that I heard for what purpose it
was all destined. You have not, I know, yet made up the full sum for
your substitute, John Simpson; therefore do me the favour to use the five
guinea bank note which you will find within the ballad. You shall not
find me as hard a creditor as Attorney Case. Pay me the money at your
own convenience. If it is never convenient to you to pay it, I shall
never ask it. I shall go my rounds again through this country, I
believe, about this time next year, and will call to see how you do, and
to play the new tune for Susan and the dear little boys. "I should just add, to set your heart at rest about the money, that it
does not distress me at all to lend it to you. I am not quite so poor as
I appear to be. But it is my humour to go about as I do. I see more of
the world under my tattered garb than, perhaps, I should ever see in a
better dress. There are many of my profession who are of the same mind
as myself in this respect; and we are glad, when it lies in our way, to
do any kindness to such a worthy family as yours.--So, fare ye well. "Your obliged Friend,
                                             "LLEWELLYN." Susan now, by her father's desire, opened the ballad. He picked up the
five guinea bank note, whilst she read, with surprise, "Susan's
Lamentation for her Lamb." Her mother leaned over her shoulder to read
the words; but they were interrupted, before they had finished the first
stanza, by another knock at the door. It was not the postman with
another letter. It was Sir Arthur and his sisters. They came with an intention, which they were much disappointed to find
that the old harper had rendered vain--they came to lend the farmer and
his good family the money to pay for his substitute. "But, since we are here," said Sir Arthur, "let me do my own business,
which I had like to have forgotten. Mr. Price, will you come out with
me, and let me show you a piece of your land, through which I want to
make a road. Look there," said Sir Arthur, pointing to the spot, "I am
laying out a ride round my estate, and that bit of land of yours stops
me." "Why, sir," said Price, "the land's mine, to be sure, for that matter;
but I hope you don't look upon me to be that sort of person that would be
stiff about a trifle or so." "The fact is," said Sir Arthur, "I had heard you were a litigious, pig-
headed fellow; but you do not seem to deserve this character." "Hope not, sir," said the farmer; "but about the matter of the land, I
don't want to take any advantage of your wishing for it. You are welcome
to it; and I leave it to you to find me out another bit of land
convenient to me that will be worth neither more nor less; or else to
make up the value to me some way or other. I need say no more about it." "I hear something," continued Sir Arthur, after a short silence--"I hear
something, Mr. Price, of a FLAW in your lease. I would not speak to you
about it whilst we were bargaining about your land, lest I should over-
awe you; but, tell me, what is this flaw?" "In truth, and the truth is the fittest thing to be spoken at all times,"
said the farmer, "I didn't know myself what a flaw, as they call it,
meant, till I heard of the word from Attorney Case; and, I take it, a
flaw is neither more nor less than a mistake, as one should say. Now, by
reason a man does not make a mistake on purpose, it seems to me to be the
fair thing, that if a man finds out his mistake, he might set it right;
but Attorney Case says this is not law; and I've no more to say. The man
who drew up my lease made a mistake; and if I must suffer for it, I
must," said the farmer. "However, I can show you, Sir Arthur, just for
my own satisfaction and yours, a few lines of a memorandum on a slip of
paper, which was given me by your relation, the gentleman who lived here
before, and let me my farm. You'll see, by that bit of paper, what was
meant; but the attorney says, the paper's not worth a button in a court
of justice, and I don't understand these things. All I understand is the
common honesty of the matter. I've no more to say." "This attorney, whom you speak of so often," said Sir Arthur, "you seem
to have some quarrel with. Now, would you tell me frankly what is the
matter between--?" "The matter between us, then," said Price, "is a little bit of ground,
not worth much, that is there open to the lane at the end of Mr. Case's
garden, sir, and he wanted to take it in. Now I told him my mind, that
it belonged to the parish, and that I never would willingly give my
consent to his cribbing it in that way. Sir, I was the more loath to see
it shut into his garden, which, moreover, is large enough of all
conscience without it, because you must know, Sir Arthur, the children in
our village are fond of making a little play-green of it; and they have a
custom of meeting on May day at a hawthorn that stands in the middle of
it, and altogether I was very loath to see 'em turned out of it by those
who have no right." "Let us go and see this nook," said Sir Arthur. "It is not far off, is
it?" "Oh, no, sir, just hard by here." When they got to the ground, Mr. Case, who saw them walking together, was
in a hurry to join them, that he might put a stop to any explanations. Explanations were things of which he had a great dread; but, fortunately,
he was upon this occasion a little too late. "Is this the nook in dispute?" said Sir Arthur. "Yes; this is the whole thing," said Price. "Why, Sir Arthur," interposed the politic attorney, with an assumed air
of generosity, "don't let us talk any more about it. Let it belong to
whom it will, I give it up to you." "So great a lawyer, Mr. Case, as you are," replied Sir Arthur, "must
know, that a man cannot give up that to which he has no legal title; and
in this case it is impossible that, with the best intentions to oblige me
in the world, you can give up this bit of land to me, because it is mine
already, as I can convince you effectually by a map of the adjoining
land, which I have fortunately safe amongst my papers. This piece of
ground belonged to the farm on the opposite side of the road, and it was
cut off when the lane was made." "Very possibly. I daresay you are quite correct; you must know best,"
said the attorney, trembling for the agency. "Then," said Sir Arthur, "Mr. Price, you will observe that I now promise
this little green to the children for a play-ground; and I hope they may
gather hawthorn many a May day at this their favourite bush." Mr. Price
bowed low, which he seldom did, even when he received a favour himself. "And now, Mr. Case," said Sir Arthur, turning to the attorney, who did
not know which way to look, "you sent me a lease to look over." "Ye-ye-yes," stammered Mr Case. "I thought it my duty to do so; not out
of any malice or ill-will to this good man." "You have done him no injury," said Sir Arthur, coolly. "I am ready to
make him a new lease, whenever he pleases, of his farm, and I shall be
guided by a memorandum of the original bargain, which he has in his
possession. I hope I never shall take an unfair advantage of anyone." "Heaven forbid, sir," said the attorney, sanctifying his face, "that I
should suggest the taking an UNFAIR advantage of any man, rich or poor;
but to break a bad lease is not taking an unfair advantage." "You really think so?" said Sir Arthur. "Certainly I do, and I hope I have not hazarded your good opinion by
speaking my mind concerning the flaw so plainly.