When he had done, his auditors looked round, sighed and wished that
Archer had been their manager. They turned from De Grey as from a person
who had done them an injury. Some of his friends--for he had friends who
were not swayed by the popular opinion--felt indignation at this
ingratitude, and were going to express their feelings; but De Grey
stopped them, and begged that he might speak for himself. "Gentlemen," said he, coming forward, as soon as he felt that he had
sufficient command of himself. "My friends, I see you are discontented
with me and my playhouse. I have done my best to please you; but if
anybody else can please you better, I shall be glad of it. I did not
work so hard for the glory of being your manager. You have my free leave
to tear down--"  Here his voice faltered, but he hurried on--"You have my
free leave to tear down all my work as fast as you please. Archer, shake
hands first, however, to show that there's no malice in the case." Archer, who was touched by what his rival said, and, stopping the hand of
his new partisan, Fisher, cried, "No, Fisher! no!--no pulling down. We
can alter it. There is a great deal of ingenuity in it, considering." In vain Archer would now have recalled the public to reason,--the time
for reason was passed:  enthusiasm had taken hold of their minds. "Down
with it! Down with it! Archer for ever!" cried Fisher, and tore down
the curtain. The riot once begun, nothing could stop the little mob,
till the whole theatre was demolished. The love of power prevailed in
the mind of Archer; he was secretly flattered by the zeal of his PARTY,
and he mistook their love of mischief for attachment to himself. De Grey
looked on superior. "I said I could bear to see all this, and I can,"
said he; "now it is all over." And now it was all over, there was
silence. The rioters stood still to take breath, and to look at what
they had done. There was a blank space before them. In this moment of silence there was heard something like a voice. "Hush! What strange voice is that?" said Archer. Fisher caught fast hold of his
arm. Everybody looked round to see where the voice came from. It was
dusk. Two window-shutters at the farthest end of the building were seen
to move slowly inwards. De Grey, and in the same instant Archer, went
forward; and, as the shutters opened, there appeared through the hole the
dark face and shrivelled hands of a very old gipsy. She did not speak;
but she looked first at one and then at another. At length she fixed her
eyes on De Grey. "Well, woman," said he, "what do you want with me?" "Want!--nothing--with YOU," said the old woman; "do you want nothing with
ME?" "Nothing," said De Grey. Her eye immediately turned upon Archer,--"YOU
want something with me," said she, with emphasis. "I--what do I want?" replied Archer. "No," said she, changing her tone, "you want nothing--nothing will you
ever want, or I am much mistaken in that FACE." In that WATCH-CHAIN, she should have said, for her quick eye had espied
Archer's watch-chain. He was the only person in the company who had a
watch, and she therefore judged him to be the richest. "Had you ever your fortune told, sir, in your life?" "Not I!" said he, looking at De Grey, as if he was afraid of his
ridicule, if he listened to the gipsy. "Not you! No! for you will make your own fortune, and the fortune of all
that belong to you!" "There's good news for my friends!" cried Archer. "And I'm one of them, remember that," cried Fisher. "And I," "And I,"
joined a number of voices. "Good luck to them!" cried the gipsy, "good luck to them all!" Then, as soon as they had acquired sufficient confidence in her good
will, they pressed up to the window. "There," cried Townsend, as he
chanced to stumble over the carpenter's mitre box, which stood in the
way, "there's a good omen for me. I've stumbled on the mitre box; I
shall certainly be a bishop." Happy he who had sixpence, for he bid fair to be a judge upon the bench. And happier he who had a shilling, for he was in the high road to be one
day upon the woolsack, Lord High Chancellor of England. No one had half
a crown, or no one would surely have kept it in his pocket upon such an
occasion, for he might have been an archbishop, a king, or what he
pleased. Fisher, who like all weak people was extremely credulous, kept his post
immovable in the front row all the time, his mouth open, and his stupid
eyes fixed upon the gipsy, in whom he felt implicit faith. Those who have least confidence in their own powers, and who have least
expectation from the success of their own exertions, are always most
disposed to trust in fortune-tellers and fortune. They hope to WIN, when
they cannot EARN; and as they can never be convinced by those who speak
sense, it is no wonder they are always persuaded by those who talk
nonsense. "I have a question to put," said Fisher, in a solemn tone. "Put it, then," said Archer, "what hinders you?" "But they will hear me," said he, looking suspiciously at De Grey. "_I_ shall not hear you," said De Grey, "I am going." Everybody else
drew back, and left him to whisper his question in the gipsy's ear. "What is become of my Livy?" "Your SISTER Livy, do you mean?" said the gipsy. "No, my LATIN Livy." The gipsy paused for information. "It had a leaf torn out in the
beginning, and I HATE DR. MIDDLETON--"

"Written in it," interrupted the gipsy. "Right--the very book!" cried Fisher with joy. "But how COULD you know
it was Dr. Middleton's name? I thought I had scratched it, so that
nobody could make it out." "Nobody COULD make it out but ME," replied the gipsy. "But never think
to deceive me," said she, shaking her head at him in a manner that made
him tremble. "I don't deceive you indeed, I tell you the whole truth. I lost it a
week ago." "True." "And when shall I find it?" "Meet me here at this hour to-morrow evening, and I will answer you. No
more! I must be gone. Not a word more to-night." She pulled the shutters towards her, and left the youth in darkness. All
his companions were gone. He had been so deeply engaged in this
conference, that he had not perceived their departure. He found all the
world at supper, but no entreaties could prevail upon him to disclose his
secret. Townsend rallied in vain. As for Archer, he was not disposed to
destroy by ridicule the effect which he saw that the old woman's
predictions in his favour had had upon the imagination of many of his
little partisans. He had privately slipped two good shillings into the
gipsy's hand to secure her; for he was willing to pay any price for ANY
means of acquiring power. The watch-chain had not deceived the gipsy, for Archer was the richest
person in the community. His friends had imprudently supplied him with
more money than is usually trusted to boys of his age.