You cannot prove that God is better than a man; nor
can you prove that a man is better than a horse. Why permit any
ordinary thing? Why do you let a horse be saddled?" "Some modern thinkers disapprove of it," said Turnbull a little
doubtfully. "I know," said MacIan grimly; "that man who talked about love,
for instance." Turnbull made a humorous grimace; then he said: "We seem to be
talking in a kind of shorthand; but I won't pretend not to
understand you. What you mean is this: that you learnt about all
your saints and angels at the same time as you learnt about
common morality, from the same people, in the same way. And you
mean to say that if one may be disputed, so may the other. Well,
let that pass for the moment. But let me ask you a question in
turn. Did not this system of yours, which you swallowed whole,
contain all sorts of things that were merely local, the respect
for the chief of your clan, or such things; the village ghost,
the family feud, or what not? Did you not take in those things,
too, along with your theology?" MacIan stared along the dim village road, down which the last
straggler from the inn was trailing his way. "What you say is not unreasonable," he said. "But it is not quite
true. The distinction between the chief and us did exist; but it
was never anything like the distinction between the human and the
divine, or the human and the animal. It was more like the
distinction between one animal and another. But----"

"Well?" said Turnbull. MacIan was silent. "Go on," repeated Turnbull; "what's the matter with you? What are
you staring at?" "I am staring," said MacIan at last, "at that which shall judge
us both." "Oh, yes," said Turnbull in a tired way, "I suppose you mean
God." "No, I don't," said MacIan, shaking his head. "I mean him." And he pointed to the half-tipsy yokel who was ploughing down the
road. "What do you mean?" asked the atheist. "I mean him," repeated MacIan with emphasis. "He goes out in the
early dawn; he digs or he ploughs a field. Then he comes back and
drinks ale, and then he sings a song. All your philosophies and
political systems are young compared to him. All your hoary
cathedrals, yes, even the Eternal Church on earth is new compared
to him. The most mouldering gods in the British Museum are new
facts beside him. It is he who in the end shall judge us all." And MacIan rose to his feet with a vague excitement. "What are you going to do?" "I am going to ask him," cried MacIan, "which of us is right." Turnbull broke into a kind of laugh. "Ask that intoxicated
turnip-eater----" he began. "Yes--which of us is right," cried MacIan violently. "Oh, you
have long words and I have long words; and I talk of every man
being the image of God; and you talk of every man being a citizen
and enlightened enough to govern. But if every man typifies God,
there is God. If every man is an enlightened citizen, there is
your enlightened citizen. The first man one meets is always man. Let us catch him up." And in gigantic strides the long, lean Highlander whirled away
into the grey twilight, Turnbull following with a good-humoured
oath. The track of the rustic was easy to follow, even in the faltering
dark; for he was enlivening his wavering walk with song. It was
an interminable poem, beginning with some unspecified King
William, who (it appeared) lived in London town and who after the
second rise vanished rather abruptly from the train of thought. The rest was almost entirely about beer and was thick with local
topography of a quite unrecognizable kind. The singer's step was
neither very rapid, nor, indeed, exceptionally secure; so the
song grew louder and louder and the two soon overtook him. He was a man elderly or rather of any age, with lean grey hair
and a lean red face, but with that remarkable rustic physiognomy
in which it seems that all the features stand out independently
from the face; the rugged red nose going out like a limb; the
bleared blue eyes standing out like signals. He gave them greeting with the elaborate urbanity of the slightly
intoxicated. MacIan, who was vibrating with one of his silent,
violent decisions, opened the question without delay. He
explained the philosophic position in words as short and simple
as possible. But the singular old man with the lank red face
seemed to think uncommonly little of the short words. He fixed
with a fierce affection upon one or two of the long ones. "Atheists!" he repeated with luxurious scorn. "Atheists! I
know their sort, master. Atheists! Don't talk to me about 'un. Atheists!" The grounds of his disdain seemed a little dark and confused; but
they were evidently sufficient. MacIan resumed in some
encouragement:

"You think as I do, I hope; you think that a man should be
connected with the Church; with the common Christian----"

The old man extended a quivering stick in the direction of a
distant hill. "There's the church," he said thickly. "Grassley old church that
is. Pulled down it was, in the old squire's time, and----"

"I mean," explained MacIan elaborately, "that you think that
there should be someone typifying religion, a priest----"

"Priests!" said the old man with sudden passion. "Priests! I
know 'un. What they want in England? That's what I say. What
they want in England?" "They want you," said MacIan. "Quite so," said Turnbull, "and me; but they won't get us. MacIan, your attempt on the primitive innocence does not seem
very successful. Let me try. What you want, my friend, is your
rights. You don't want any priests or churches. A vote, a right
to speak is what you----"

"Who says I a'n't got a right to speak?" said the old man, facing
round in an irrational frenzy. "I got a right to speak. I'm a
man, I am. I don't want no votin' nor priests. I say a man's a
man; that's what I say. If a man a'n't a man, what is he? That's
what I say, if a man a'n't a man, what is he? When I sees a man,
I sez 'e's a man." "Quite so," said Turnbull, "a citizen." "I say he's a man," said the rustic furiously, stopping and
striking his stick on the ground. "Not a city or owt else. He's a
man." "You're perfectly right," said the sudden voice of MacIan,
falling like a sword. "And you have kept close to something the
whole world of today tries to forget." "Good night." And the old man went on wildly singing into the night. "A jolly old creature," said Turnbull; "he didn't seem able to
get much beyond that fact that a man is a man."