"Oh! if these are your only objections," cried Mrs Smith, archly,
"Mr Elliot is safe, and I shall give myself no more trouble about him. Do not forget me when you are married, that's all. Let him know me to be
a friend of yours, and then he will think little of the trouble required,
which it is very natural for him now, with so many affairs and engagements
of his own, to avoid and get rid of as he can; very natural, perhaps. Ninety-nine out of a hundred would do the same. Of course,
he cannot be aware of the importance to me. Well, my dear Miss Elliot,
I hope and trust you will be very happy. Mr Elliot has sense
to understand the value of such a woman. Your peace will not be
shipwrecked as mine has been. You are safe in all worldly matters,
and safe in his character. He will not be led astray; he will not be
misled by others to his ruin." "No," said Anne, "I can readily believe all that of my cousin. He seems to have a calm decided temper, not at all open
to dangerous impressions. I consider him with great respect. I have no reason, from any thing that has fallen within my observation,
to do otherwise. But I have not known him long; and he is not a man,
I think, to be known intimately soon. Will not this manner
of speaking of him, Mrs Smith, convince you that he is nothing to me? Surely this must be calm enough. And, upon my word, he is nothing to me. Should he ever propose to me (which I have very little reason to imagine
he has any thought of doing), I shall not accept him. I assure you
I shall not. I assure you, Mr Elliot had not the share which
you have been supposing, in whatever pleasure the concert
of last night might afford:  not Mr Elliot; it is not Mr Elliot that--"

She stopped, regretting with a deep blush that she had implied so much;
but less would hardly have been sufficient. Mrs Smith would hardly
have believed so soon in Mr Elliot's failure, but from the perception
of there being a somebody else. As it was, she instantly submitted,
and with all the semblance of seeing nothing beyond; and Anne,
eager to escape farther notice, was impatient to know why Mrs Smith
should have fancied she was to marry Mr Elliot; where she could have
received the idea, or from whom she could have heard it. "Do tell me how it first came into your head." "It first came into my head," replied Mrs Smith, "upon finding how much
you were together, and feeling it to be the most probable thing
in the world to be wished for by everybody belonging to either of you;
and you may depend upon it that all your acquaintance have disposed of you
in the same way. But I never heard it spoken of till two days ago." "And has it indeed been spoken of?" "Did you observe the woman who opened the door to you when
you called yesterday?" "No. Was not it Mrs Speed, as usual, or the maid? I observed
no one in particular." "It was my friend Mrs Rooke; Nurse Rooke; who, by-the-bye,
had a great curiosity to see you, and was delighted to be in the way
to let you in. She came away from Marlborough Buildings only on Sunday;
and she it was who told me you were to marry Mr Elliot. She had had it from Mrs Wallis herself, which did not seem bad authority. She sat an hour with me on Monday evening, and gave me the whole history." "The whole history," repeated Anne, laughing. "She could not make
a very long history, I think, of one such little article
of unfounded news." Mrs Smith said nothing. "But," continued Anne, presently, "though there is no truth in my having
this claim on Mr Elliot, I should be extremely happy to be of use to you
in any way that I could. Shall I mention to him your being in Bath? Shall I take any message?" "No, I thank you:  no, certainly not. In the warmth of the moment,
and under a mistaken impression, I might, perhaps, have endeavoured
to interest you in some circumstances; but not now. No, I thank you,
I have nothing to trouble you with." "I think you spoke of having known Mr Elliot many years?" "I did." "Not before he was married, I suppose?" "Yes; he was not married when I knew him first." "And--were you much acquainted?" "Intimately." "Indeed! Then do tell me what he was at that time of life. I have a great curiosity to know what Mr Elliot was as a very young man. Was he at all such as he appears now?" "I have not seen Mr Elliot these three years," was Mrs Smith's answer,
given so gravely that it was impossible to pursue the subject farther;
and Anne felt that she had gained nothing but an increase of curiosity. They were both silent:  Mrs Smith very thoughtful. At last--

"I beg your pardon, my dear Miss Elliot," she cried, in her
natural tone of cordiality, "I beg your pardon for the short answers
I have been giving you, but I have been uncertain what I ought to do. I have been doubting and considering as to what I ought to tell you. There were many things to be taken into the account. One hates
to be officious, to be giving bad impressions, making mischief. Even the smooth surface of family-union seems worth preserving,
though there may be nothing durable beneath. However, I have determined;
I think I am right; I think you ought to be made acquainted
with Mr Elliot's real character. Though I fully believe that,
at present, you have not the smallest intention of accepting him,
there is no saying what may happen. You might, some time or other,
be differently affected towards him. Hear the truth, therefore,
now, while you are unprejudiced. Mr Elliot is a man without heart
or conscience; a designing, wary, cold-blooded being, who thinks
only of himself; whom for his own interest or ease, would be guilty
of any cruelty, or any treachery, that could be perpetrated without
risk of his general character. He has no feeling for others. Those whom he has been the chief cause of leading into ruin,
he can neglect and desert without the smallest compunction. He is totally beyond the reach of any sentiment of justice or compassion. Oh! he is black at heart, hollow and black!" Anne's astonished air, and exclamation of wonder, made her pause,
and in a calmer manner, she added,

"My expressions startle you. You must allow for an injured, angry woman. But I will try to command myself. I will not abuse him. I will only tell you what I have found him. Facts shall speak. He was the intimate friend of my dear husband, who trusted and loved him,
and thought him as good as himself. The intimacy had been formed
before our marriage. I found them most intimate friends; and I, too,
became excessively pleased with Mr Elliot, and entertained
the highest opinion of him. At nineteen, you know, one does not
think very seriously; but Mr Elliot appeared to me quite as good as others,
and much more agreeable than most others, and we were almost
always together. We were principally in town, living in very good style. He was then the inferior in circumstances; he was then the poor one;
he had chambers in the Temple, and it was as much as he could do
to support the appearance of a gentleman. He had always a home
with us whenever he chose it; he was always welcome; he was like a brother. My poor Charles, who had the finest, most generous spirit in the world,
would have divided his last farthing with him; and I know that his purse
was open to him; I know that he often assisted him." "This must have been about that very period of Mr Elliot's life,"
said Anne, "which has always excited my particular curiosity. It must have been about the same time that he became known to
my father and sister. I never knew him myself; I only heard of him;
but there was a something in his conduct then, with regard to
my father and sister, and afterwards in the circumstances of his marriage,
which I never could quite reconcile with present times. It seemed
to announce a different sort of man." "I know it all, I know it all," cried Mrs Smith. "He had been
introduced to Sir Walter and your sister before I was acquainted with him,
but I heard him speak of them for ever. I know he was invited
and encouraged, and I know he did not choose to go. I can satisfy you,
perhaps, on points which you would little expect; and as to his marriage,
I knew all about it at the time. I was privy to all the fors and againsts;
I was the friend to whom he confided his hopes and plans; and though
I did not know his wife previously, her inferior situation in society,
indeed, rendered that impossible, yet I knew her all her life afterwards,
or at least till within the last two years of her life, and can answer
any question you may wish to put." "Nay," said Anne, "I have no particular enquiry to make about her. I have always understood they were not a happy couple. But I should
like to know why, at that time of his life, he should slight
my father's acquaintance as he did. My father was certainly disposed
to take very kind and proper notice of him. Why did Mr Elliot draw back?"