By the Gods,
You shall digest the Venom of your Spleene
Though it do Split you. For, from this day forth,
Ile vse you for my Mirth, yea for my Laughter
When you are Waspish

   Cassi. Is it come to this? Bru. You say, you are a better Souldier:
Let it appeare so; make your vaunting true,
And it shall please me well. For mine owne part,
I shall be glad to learne of Noble men

   Cass. You wrong me euery way:
You wrong me Brutus:
I saide, an Elder Souldier, not a Better. Did I say Better? Bru. If you did, I care not

   Cass. When Caesar liu'd, he durst not thus haue mou'd me

   Brut. Peace, peace, you durst not so haue tempted him

   Cassi. I durst not

   Bru. No

   Cassi. What? durst not tempt him? Bru. For your life you durst not

   Cassi. Do not presume too much vpon my Loue,
I may do that I shall be sorry for

   Bru. You haue done that you should be sorry for. There is no terror Cassius in your threats:
For I am Arm'd so strong in Honesty,
That they passe by me, as the idle winde,
Which I respect not. I did send to you
For certaine summes of Gold, which you deny'd me,
For I can raise no money by vile meanes:
By Heauen, I had rather Coine my Heart,
And drop my blood for Drachmaes, then to wring
From the hard hands of Peazants, their vile trash
By any indirection. I did send
To you for Gold to pay my Legions,
Which you deny'd me: was that done like Cassius? Should I haue answer'd Caius Cassius so? When Marcus Brutus growes so Couetous,
To locke such Rascall Counters from his Friends,
Be ready Gods with all your Thunder-bolts,
Dash him to peeces

   Cassi. I deny'd you not

   Bru. You did

   Cassi. I did not. He was but a Foole
That brought my answer back. Brutus hath riu'd my hart:
A Friend should beare his Friends infirmities;
But Brutus makes mine greater then they are

   Bru. I do not, till you practice them on me

   Cassi. You loue me not

   Bru. I do not like your faults

   Cassi. A friendly eye could neuer see such faults

   Bru. A Flatterers would not, though they do appeare
As huge as high Olympus

   Cassi. Come Antony, and yong Octauius come,
Reuenge your selues alone on Cassius,
For Cassius is a-weary of the World:
Hated by one he loues, brau'd by his Brother,
Check'd like a bondman, all his faults obseru'd,
Set in a Note-booke, learn'd, and con'd by roate
To cast into my Teeth. O I could weepe
My Spirit from mine eyes. There is my Dagger,
And heere my naked Breast: Within, a Heart
Deerer then Pluto's Mine, Richer then Gold:
If that thou bee'st a Roman, take it foorth. I that deny'd thee Gold, will giue my Heart:
Strike as thou did'st at Caesar: For I know,
When thou did'st hate him worst, y loued'st him better
Then euer thou loued'st Cassius

   Bru. Sheath your Dagger:
Be angry when you will, it shall haue scope:
Do what you will, Dishonor, shall be Humour. O Cassius, you are yoaked with a Lambe
That carries Anger, as the Flint beares fire,
Who much inforced, shewes a hastie Sparke,
And straite is cold agen

   Cassi. Hath Cassius liu'd
To be but Mirth and Laughter to his Brutus,
When greefe and blood ill temper'd, vexeth him? Bru. When I spoke that, I was ill temper'd too

   Cassi. Do you confesse so much? Giue me your hand

   Bru. And my heart too

   Cassi. O Brutus! Bru. What's the matter? Cassi. Haue not you loue enough to beare with me,
When that rash humour which my Mother gaue me
Makes me forgetfull

   Bru. Yes Cassius, and from henceforth
When you are ouer-earnest with your Brutus,
Hee'l thinke your Mother chides, and leaue you so. Enter a Poet. Poet. Let me go in to see the Generals,
There is some grudge betweene 'em, 'tis not meete
They be alone

   Lucil. You shall not come to them

   Poet. Nothing but death shall stay me

   Cas. How now? What's the matter? Poet. For shame you Generals; what do you meane? Loue, and be Friends, as two such men should bee,
For I haue seene more yeeres I'me sure then yee

   Cas. Ha, ha, how vildely doth this Cynicke rime? Bru. Get you hence sirra: Sawcy Fellow, hence

   Cas. Beare with him Brutus, 'tis his fashion

   Brut. Ile know his humor, when he knowes his time:
What should the Warres do with these Iigging Fooles? Companion, hence

   Cas. Away, away be gone. Exit Poet

  Bru. Lucillius and Titinius bid the Commanders
Prepare to lodge their Companies to night

   Cas. And come your selues, & bring Messala with you
Immediately to vs

   Bru. Lucius, a bowle of Wine

   Cas. I did not thinke you could haue bin so angry

   Bru. O Cassius, I am sicke of many greefes

   Cas. Of your Philosophy you make no vse,
If you giue place to accidentall euils

   Bru. No man beares sorrow better. Portia is dead

   Cas. Ha? Portia? Bru. She is dead

   Cas. How scap'd I killing, when I crost you so? O insupportable, and touching losse! Vpon what sicknesse? Bru. Impatient of my absence,
And greefe, that yong Octauius with Mark Antony
Haue made themselues so strong: For with her death
That tydings came. With this she fell distract,
And (her Attendants absent) swallow'd fire

   Cas. And dy'd so? Bru. Euen so

   Cas. O ye immortall Gods! Enter Boy with Wine, and Tapers. Bru. Speak no more of her: Giue me a bowl of wine,
In this I bury all vnkindnesse Cassius. Drinkes

  Cas. My heart is thirsty for that Noble pledge. Fill Lucius, till the Wine ore-swell the Cup:
I cannot drinke too much of Brutus loue. Enter Titinius and Messala.