In this she was not mistaken. The housekeeper came
close up to the dressing table, and continued, "I never like to speak
till I'm sure, ma'am, and I'm not quite sure, to say certain, in this
case, ma'am, but still I think it right to tell you, which can't wrong
anybody, what came across my mind about this same guinea-hen, ma'am; and
you can inquire into it, and do as you please afterwards, ma'am. Some
time ago we had fine guinea-fowls of our own, and I made bold, not
thinking, to be sure, that all our own would die away from us, as they
have done, to give a fine couple last Christmas to Susan Price, and very
fond and pleased she was at the time, and I'm sure would never have
parted with the hen with her good-will; but if my eyes don't strangely
mistake, this hen, that comes from Miss Barbara, is the selfsame
identical guinea-hen that I gave to Susan. And how Miss Bab came by it
is the thing that puzzles me. If my boy Philip was at home, maybe, as
he's often at Mrs. Price's (which I don't disapprove), he might know the
history of the guinea-hen. I expect him home this night, and if you have
no objection, I will sift the affair." "The shortest way, I think," said Henrietta, "would be to ask Miss Case
herself about it, which I will do this evening." "If you please, ma'am," said the housekeeper, coldly; for she knew that
Miss Barbara was not famous in the village for speaking truth. Dinner was now served. Attorney Case expected to smell mint sauce, and,
as the covers were taken from off the dishes, looked around for lamb; but
no lamb appeared. He had a dexterous knack of twisting the conversation
to his point. Sir Arthur was speaking, when they sat down to dinner, of
a new carving knife, which he lately had had made for his sister. The
attorney immediately went from carving-knives to poultry; thence to
butcher's meat. Some joints, he observed, were much more difficult to
carve than others. He never saw a man carve better than the gentleman
opposite him, who was the curate of the parish. "But, sir," said the
vulgar attorney, "I must make bold to differ with you in one point, and
I'll appeal to Sir Arthur. Sir Arthur, pray may I ask, when you carve a
forequarter of lamb, do you, when you raise the shoulder, throw in salt,
or not?" This well prepared question was not lost upon Sir Arthur. The
attorney was thanked for his intended present; but mortified and
surprised to hear Sir Arthur say that it was a constant rule of his never
to accept of any presents from his neighbours. "If we were to accept a
lamb from a rich neighbour on my estate," said he, "I am afraid we should
mortify many of our poor tenants, who can have little to offer, though,
perhaps, they may bear us thorough good-will notwithstanding." After the ladies left the dining-room, as they were walking up and down
the large hall, Miss Barbara had a fair opportunity of imitating her keen
father's method of conversing. One of the ladies observed, that this
hall would be a charming place for music. Bab brought in harps and
harpers, and the harpers' ball, in a breath. "I know so much about it,--
about the ball I mean," said she, "because a lady in Shrewsbury, a friend
of papa's, offered to take me with her; but papa did not like to give her
the trouble of sending so far for me, though she has a coach of her own." Barbara fixed her eyes upon Miss Somers as she spoke; but she could not
read her countenance as distinctly as she wished, because Miss Somers was
at this moment letting down the veil of her hat. "Shall we walk out before tea?" said Miss Somers to her companions; "I
have a pretty guinea-hen to show you." Barbara, secretly drawing
propitious omens from the guinea-hen, followed with a confidential step. The pheasantry was well filled with pheasants, peacocks, etc., and
Susan's pretty little guinea-hen appeared well, even in this high
company. It was much admired. Barbara was in glory; but her glory was
of short duration. Just as Miss Somers was going to inquire into the guinea-hen's history,
Philip came up, to ask permission to have a bit of sycamore, to turn a
nutmeg box for his mother. He was an ingenious lad, and a good turner
for his age. Sir Arthur had put by a bit of sycamore, on purpose for
him; and Miss Somers told him where it was to be found. He thanked her:
but in the midst of his bow of thanks his eye was struck by the sight of
the guinea-hen, and he involuntarily exclaimed, "Susan's guinea-hen, I
declare!" "No, it's not Susan's guinea-hen," said Miss Barbara,
colouring furiously; "it is mine, and I have made a present of it to Miss
Somers." At the sound of Bab's voice, Philip turned--saw her--and indignation,
unrestrained by the presence of all the amazed spectators, flashed in his
countenance. "What is the matter, Philip?" said Miss Somers, in a pacifying tone; but
Philip was not inclined to be pacified. "Why, ma'am," said he, "may I
speak out?" and, without waiting for permission, he spoke out, and gave a
full, true, and warm account of Rose's embassy, and of Miss Barbara's
cruel and avaricious proceedings. Barbara denied, prevaricated, stammered, and at last was overcome with
confusion; for which even the most indulgent spectators could scarcely
pity her. Miss Somers, however, mindful of what was due to her guest, was anxious
to dispatch Philip for his piece of sycamore. Bab recovered herself as
soon as he was out of sight; but she further exposed herself by
exclaiming, "I'm sure I wish this pitiful guinea-hen had never come into
my possession. I wish Susan had kept it at home, as she should have
done!" "Perhaps she will be more careful now that she has received so strong a
lesson," said Miss Somers. "Shall we try her?" continued she. "Philip
will, I daresay, take the guinea-hen back to Susan, if we desire it." "If you please, ma'am," said Barbara, sullenly; "I have nothing more to
do with it." So the guinea-hen was delivered to Philip, who set off joyfully with his
prize, and was soon in sight of Farmer Price's cottage. He stopped when
he came to the door. He recollected Rose and her generous friendship for
Susan. He was determined that she should have the pleasure of restoring
the guinea-hen. He ran into the village. All the children who had given
up their little purse on May day were assembled on the play-green. They
were delighted to see the guinea-hen once more. Philip took his pipe and
tabor, and they marched in innocent triumph towards the whitewashed
cottage. "Let me come with you--let me come with you," said the butcher's boy to
Philip. "Stop one minute! my father has something to say to you." He
darted into his father's house. The little procession stopped, and in a
few minutes the bleating of a lamb was heard. Through a back passage,
which led into the paddock behind the house, they saw the butcher leading
a lamb. "It is Daisy!" exclaimed Rose--"It's Daisy!" repeated all her companions. "Susan's lamb! Susan's lamb!" and there was a universal shout of joy. "Well, for my part," said the good butcher, as soon as he could be
heard,--"for my part, I would not be so cruel as Attorney Case for the
whole world. These poor brute beasts don't know aforehand what's going
to happen to them; and as for dying, it's what we must all do some time
or another; but to keep wringing the hearts of the living, that have as
much sense as one's self, is what I call cruel; and is not this what
Attorney Case has been doing by poor Susan and her whole family, ever
since he took a spite against them? But, at anyrate, here's Susan's lamb
safe and sound. I'd have taken it back sooner, but I was off before day
to the fair, and am but just come back. Daisy, however, has been as well
off in my paddock as he would have been in the field by the waterside." The obliging shopkeeper, who showed the pretty calicoes to Susan, was now
at his door, and when he saw the lamb, and heard that it was Susan's, and
learned its history, he said that he would add his mite; and he gave the
children some ends of narrow riband, with which Rose decorated her
friend's lamb. The pipe and tabor now once more began to play, and the procession moved
on in joyful order, after giving the humane butcher three cheers; three
cheers which were better deserved than "loud huzzas" usually are. Susan was working in her arbour, with her little deal table before her. When she heard the sound of the music, she put down her work and
listened. She saw the crowd of children coming nearer and nearer. They
had closed round Daisy, so that she did not see it; but as they came up
to the garden gate she saw that Rose beckoned to her. Philip played as
loud as he could, that she might not hear, till the proper moment, the
bleating of the lamb. Susan opened the garden-wicket, and at this signal
the crowd divided, and the first thing that Susan saw, in the midst of
her taller friends, was little smiling Mary, with the guinea-hen in her
arms. "Come on! Come on!" cried Mary, as Susan started with joyful surprise;
"you have more to see." At this instant the music paused, Susan heard the bleating of a lamb, and
scarcely daring to believe her senses, she pressed eagerly forward, and
beheld poor Daisy!--she burst into tears. "I did not shed one tear when
I parted with you, my dear little Daisy!" said she. "It was for my
father and mother. I would not have parted with you for anything else in
the whole world. Thank you, thank you all," added she, to her
companions, who sympathized in her joy, even more than they had
sympathized in her sorrow. "Now, if my father was not to go away from us
next week, and if my mother was quite stout, I should be the happiest
person in the world!" As Susan pronounced these words, a voice behind the little listening
crowd cried, in a brutal tone, "Let us pass, if you please; you have no
right to stop up the public road!" This was the voice of Attorney Case,
who was returning with his daughter Barbara from his visit to the Abbey. He saw the lamb, and tried to whistle as he went on. Barbara also saw
the guinea-hen, and turned her head another way, that she might avoid the
contemptuous, reproachful looks of those whom she only affected to
despise. Even her new bonnet, in which she had expected to be so much
admired, was now only serviceable to hide her face and conceal her
mortification. "I am glad she saw the guinea-hen," cried Rose, who now held it in her
hands. "Yes," said Philip, "she'll not forget May day in a hurry."