Although this may be
attributed to these islands being surrounded with a salt, and
consequently a moist atmosphere, yet the ashes (seaweed ashes) made use
of as manure, may also have their portion of influence. "*

*It is necessary to observe that this experiment has never been actually
tried upon raspberry-plants. "And here," continued Arthur, "is something written with a pencil, on a
slip of paper, and it is Maurice's writing. I will read it to you. "'When I read in this book what is said about the strawberries growing as
large as apricots, after they had been covered over with seaweed, I
thought that perhaps seaweed ashes might be good for my father's
raspberries; and I asked him if he would give me leave to try them. He
gave me leave, and I went directly and gathered together some seaweed
that had been cast on shore; and I dried it, and burned it, and then I
manured the raspberries with it, and the year afterwards the raspberries
grew to the size that you have seen. Now, the reason I tell you this is,
first, that you may know how to manage your raspberries, and next,
because I remember you looked very grave, as if you were not pleased with
my father, Mr. Grant, when he told you that the way by which he came by
his Brobdingnag raspberries was a secret. Perhaps this was the thing
that has made you so angry with us all; for you never have come to see
father since that evening. Now I have told you all I know; and so I hope
you will not be angry with us any longer.'" Mr. Oakly was much pleased by this openness, and said, "Why now, Arthur,
this is something like, this is telling one the thing one wants to know,
without fine speeches. This is like an Englishman more than a Scotchman. Pray, Arthur, do you know whether your friend Maurice was born in England
or in Scotland?" "No, indeed, sir, I don't know--I never asked--I did not think it
signified. All I know is, that wherever he was born, he is VERY good. Look, papa, my tulip is blowing." "Upon my word," said his father, "this will be a beautiful tulip!" "It was given to me by Maurice." "And did you give him nothing for it?" was the father's inquiry. "Nothing in the world; and he gave it to me just at the time when he had
good cause to be angry with me, just when I had broken his bell-glass." "I have a great mind to let you play together again," said Arthur's
father. "Oh, if you would," cried Arthur, clapping his hands, "how happy we
should be! Do you know, father, I have often sat for an hour at a time
up in that crab-tree, looking at Maurice at work in his garden, and
wishing that I was at work with him." Here Arthur was interrupted by the attorney, who came to ask Mr. Oakly
some question about the lawsuit concerning the plum-tree. Oakly showed
him Maurice's letter; and to Arthur's extreme astonishment, the attorney
had no sooner read it, than he exclaimed, "What an artful little
gentleman this is! I never, in the course of all my practice, met with
anything better. Why, this is the most cunning letter I ever read." "Where's the cunning?" said Oakly, and he put on his spectacles. "My good sir, don't you see, that all this stuff about Brobdingnag
raspberries is to ward off your suit about the plum-tree? They know--
that is, Mr. Grant, who is sharp enough, knows--that he will be worsted
in that suit; that he must, in short, pay you a good round sum for
damages, if it goes on--"

"Damages!" said Oakly, staring round him at the plum-tree; "but I don't
know what you mean. I mean nothing but what's honest. I don't mean to
ask for any good round sum; for the plum-tree has done me no great harm
by coming into my garden; but only I don't choose it should come there
without my leave." "Well, well," said the attorney, "I understand all that; but what I want
to make you, Mr. Oakly, understand, is, that this Grant and his son only
want to make up matters with you, and prevent the thing's coming to a
fair trial, by sending on, in this underhand sort of way, a bribe of a
few raspberries." "A bribe!" exclaimed Oakly, "I never took a bribe, and I never will";
and, with sudden indignation, he pulled the raspberry plants from the
ground in which Arthur was planting them; and he threw them over the wall
into Grant's garden. Maurice had put his tulip, which was beginning to blow, in a flower-pot,
on the top of the wall, in hopes that his friend Arthur would see it from
day to day. Alas! he knew not in what a dangerous situation he had
placed it. One of his own Brobdingnag raspberry-plants, swung by the
angry arm of Oakly, struck off the head of his precious tulip! Arthur,
who was full of the thought of convincing his father that the attorney
was mistaken in his judgment of poor Maurice, did not observe the fall of
the tulip. The next day, when Maurice saw his raspberry-plants scattered upon the
ground, and his favourite tulip broken, he was in much astonishment, and,
for some moments, angry; but anger, with him, never lasted long. He was
convinced that all this must be owing to some accident or mistake. He
could not believe that anyone could be so malicious as to injure him on
purpose--"And even if they did all this on purpose to vex me," said he to
himself, "the best thing I can do, is, not to let it vex me. Forgive and
forget." This temper of mind Maurice was more happy in enjoying than he
could have been made, without it, by the possession of all the tulips in
Holland. Tulips were, at this time, things of great consequence in the estimation
of the country several miles round where Maurice and Arthur lived. There
was a florist's feast to be held at the neighbouring town, at which a
prize of a handsome set of gardening-tools was to be given to the person
who could produce the finest flower of its kind. A tulip was the flower
which was thought the finest the preceding year, and consequently numbers
of people afterwards endeavoured to procure tulip-roots, in hopes of
obtaining the prize this year. Arthur's tulip was beautiful. As he
examined it from day to day, and every day thought it improving, he
longed to thank his friend Maurice for it; and he often mounted into his
crab-tree, to look into Maurice's garden, in hopes of seeing his tulip
also in full bloom and beauty. He never could see it. The day of the florist's feast arrived, and Oakly went with his son and
the fine tulip to the place of meeting. It was on a spacious bowling-
green. All the flowers of various sorts were ranged upon a terrace at
the upper end of the bowling-green; and, amongst all this gay variety,
the tulip which Maurice had given to Arthur appeared conspicuously
beautiful. To the owner of this tulip the prize was adjudged; and, as
the handsome garden-tools were delivered to Arthur, he heard a well known
voice wish him joy. He turned, looked about him, and saw his friend
Maurice. "But, Maurice, where is your own tulip?" said Mr. Oakly; "I thought,
Arthur, you told me that he kept one for himself." "So I did," said Maurice; "but somebody (I suppose by accident) broke
it." "Somebody! who?" cried Arthur and Mr. Oakly at once. "Somebody who threw the raspberry-plants back again over the wall,"
replied Maurice. "That was me--that somebody was me," said Oakly. "I scorn to deny it;
but I did not intend to break your tulip, Maurice." "Dear Maurice," said Arthur--"you know I may call him dear Maurice--now
you are by, papa; here are all the garden-tools; take them, and welcome." "Not one of them," said Maurice, drawing back. "Offer them to the father--offer them to Mr. Grant," whispered Oakly;
"he'll take them, I'll answer for it." Mr. Oakly was mistaken:  the father would not accept of the tools. Mr.
Oakly stood surprised--"Certainly," said he to himself, "this cannot be
such a miser as I took him for"; and he walked immediately up to Grant,
and bluntly said to him, "Mr. Grant, your son has behaved very handsomely
to my son; and you seem to be glad of it." "To be sure I am," said Grant

"Which," continued Oakly, "gives me a better opinion of you than ever I
had before--I mean, than ever I had since the day you sent me the shabby
answer about those foolish, what d'ye call em, cursed raspberries." "What shabby answer?" said Grant, with surprise; and Oakly repeated
exactly the message which he received; and Grant declared that he never
sent any such message. He repeated exactly the answer which he really
sent, and Oakly immediately stretched out his hand to him, saying "I
believe you:  no more need be said. I'm only sorry I did not ask you
about this four months ago; and so I should have done if you had not been
a Scotchman. Till now, I never rightly liked a Scotchman. We may thank
this good little fellow," continued he, turning to Maurice, "for our
coming at last to a right understanding. There was no holding out
against his good nature. I'm sure, from the bottom of my heart, I'm
sorry I broke his tulip. Shake hands, boys; I'm glad to see you, Arthur,
look so happy again, and hope Mr. Grant will forgive--"

"Oh, forgive and forget," said Grant and his son at the same moment. And
from this time forward the two families lived in friendship with each
other. Oakly laughed at his own folly, in having been persuaded to go to law
about the plum-tree; and he, in process of time, so completely conquered
his early prejudice against Scotchmen, that he and Grant became partners
in business. Mr. Grant's book-LARNING and knowledge of arithmetic he
found highly useful to him; and he, on his side, possessed a great many
active, good qualities, which became serviceable to his partner. The two boys rejoiced in this family union; and Arthur often declared
that they owed all their happiness to Maurice's favourite maxim, "Forgive
and Forget." WASTE NOT, WANT NOT; or TWO STRINGS TO YOUR BOW. Mr. Gresham, a Bristol merchant, who had, by honourable industry and
economy, accumulated a considerable fortune, retired from business to a
new house which he had built upon the Downs, near Clifton. Mr. Gresham,
however, did not imagine that a new house alone could make him happy. He
did not propose to live in idleness and extravagance; for such a life
would have been equally incompatible with his habits and his principles. He was fond of children; and as he had no sons, he determined to adopt
one of his relations. He had two nephews, and he invited both of them to
his house, that he might have an opportunity of judging of their
dispositions, and of the habits which they had acquired. Hal and Benjamin, Mr. Gresham's nephews, were about ten years old. They
had been educated very differently. Hal was the son of the elder branch
of the family. His father was a gentleman, who spent rather more than he
could afford; and Hal, from the example of the servants in his father's
family, with whom he had passed the first years of his childhood, learned
to waste more of everything than he used. He had been told that
"gentlemen should be above being careful and saving":  and he had
unfortunately imbibed a notion that extravagance was the sign of a
generous disposition, and economy of an avaricious one. Benjamin, on the contrary, had been taught habits of care and foresight. His father had but a very small fortune, and was anxious that his son
should early learn that economy ensures independence, and sometimes puts
it in the power of those who are not very rich to be very generous. The morning after these two boys arrived at their uncle's they were eager
to see all the rooms in the house.