31:50 We have therefore brought an oblation for the LORD, what every
man hath gotten, of jewels of gold, chains, and bracelets, rings,
earrings, and tablets, to make an atonement for our souls before the
LORD. 31:51 And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of them, even all
wrought jewels. 31:52 And all the gold of the offering that they offered up to the
LORD, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds,
was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels. 31:53 (For the men of war had taken spoil, every man for himself.) 31:54 And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains
of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tabernacle of
the congregation, for a memorial for the children of Israel before the
LORD. 32:1 Now the children of Reuben and the children of Gad had a very
great multitude of cattle: and when they saw the land of Jazer, and
the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle;
32:2 The children of Gad and the children of Reuben came and spake
unto Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and unto the princes of the
congregation, saying, 32:3 Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah,
and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Shebam, and Nebo, and Beon, 32:4 Even
the country which the LORD smote before the congregation of Israel, is
a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle: 32:5 Wherefore, said
they, if we have found grace in thy sight, let this land be given unto
thy servants for a possession, and bring us not over Jordan. 32:6 And Moses said unto the children of Gad and to the children of
Reuben, Shall your brethren go to war, and shall ye sit here? 32:7
And wherefore discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel from
going over into the land which the LORD hath given them? 32:8 Thus
did your fathers, when I sent them from Kadeshbarnea to see the land. 32:9 For when they went up unto the valley of Eshcol, and saw the
land, they discouraged the heart of the children of Israel, that they
should not go into the land which the LORD had given them. 32:10 And the LORD's anger was kindled the same time, and he sware,
saying, 32:11 Surely none of the men that came up out of Egypt, from
twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I sware unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; because they have not wholly
followed me: 32:12 Save Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite, and
Joshua the son of Nun: for they have wholly followed the LORD. 32:13 And the LORD's anger was kindled against Israel, and he made
them wander in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation,
that had done evil in the sight of the LORD, was consumed. 32:14 And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase
of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of the LORD toward
Israel. 32:15 For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them
in the wilderness; and ye shall destroy all this people. 32:16 And they came near unto him, and said, We will build sheepfolds
here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones: 32:17 But we
ourselves will go ready armed before the children of Israel, until we
have brought them unto their place: and our little ones shall dwell in
the fenced cities because of the inhabitants of the land. 32:18 We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel
have inherited every man his inheritance. 32:19 For we will not inherit with them on yonder side Jordan, or
forward; because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side Jordan
eastward. 32:20 And Moses said unto them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will
go armed before the LORD to war, 32:21 And will go all of you armed
over Jordan before the LORD, until he hath driven out his enemies from
before him, 32:22 And the land be subdued before the LORD: then
afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless before the LORD, and
before Israel; and this land shall be your possession before the LORD. 32:23 But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the
LORD: and be sure your sin will find you out. 32:24 Build you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep;
and do that which hath proceeded out of your mouth. 32:25 And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben spake unto
Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commandeth. 32:26 Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle,
shall be there in the cities of Gilead: 32:27 But thy servants will
pass over, every man armed for war, before the LORD to battle, as my
lord saith. 32:28 So concerning them Moses commanded Eleazar the priest, and
Joshua the son of Nun, and the chief fathers of the tribes of the
children of Israel: 32:29 And Moses said unto them, If the children of
Gad and the children of Reuben will pass with you over Jordan, every
man armed to battle, before the LORD, and the land shall be subdued
before you; then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a
possession: 32:30 But if they will not pass over with you armed, they
shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan. 32:31 And the children of Gad and the children of Reuben answered,
saying, As the LORD hath said unto thy servants, so will we do. 32:32 We will pass over armed before the LORD into the land of Canaan,
that the possession of our inheritance on this side Jordan may be
ours. 32:33 And Moses gave unto them, even to the children of Gad, and to
the children of Reuben, and unto half the tribe of Manasseh the son of
Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of
Og king of Bashan, the land, with the cities thereof in the coasts,
even the cities of the country round about. 32:34 And the children of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
32:35 And Atroth, Shophan, and Jaazer, and Jogbehah, 32:36 And
Bethnimrah, and Bethharan, fenced cities: and folds for sheep. 32:37 And the children of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and
Kirjathaim, 32:38 And Nebo, and Baalmeon, (their names being changed,)
and Shibmah: and gave other names unto the cities which they builded. 32:39 And the children of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead,
and took it, and dispossessed the Amorite which was in it. 32:40 And Moses gave Gilead unto Machir the son of Manasseh; and he
dwelt therein. 32:41 And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the small towns
thereof, and called them Havothjair. 32:42 And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages thereof, and
called it Nobah, after his own name. 33:1 These are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went
forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of
Moses and Aaron. 33:2 And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by
the commandment of the LORD: and these are their journeys according to
their goings out. 33:3 And they departed from Rameses in the first month, on the
fifteenth day of the first month; on the morrow after the passover the
children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight of all the
Egyptians. 33:4 For the Egyptians buried all their firstborn, which the LORD had
smitten among them: upon their gods also the LORD executed judgments. 33:5 And the children of Israel removed from Rameses, and pitched in
Succoth. 33:6 And they departed from Succoth, and pitched in Etham, which is in
the edge of the wilderness. 33:7 And they removed from Etham, and turned again unto Pihahiroth,
which is before Baalzephon: and they pitched before Migdol. 33:8 And they departed from before Pihahiroth, and passed through the
midst of the sea into the wilderness, and went three days' journey in
the wilderness of Etham, and pitched in Marah. 33:9 And they removed from Marah, and came unto Elim: and in Elim were
twelve fountains of water, and threescore and ten palm trees; and they
pitched there. 33:10 And they removed from Elim, and encamped by the Red sea. 33:11 And they removed from the Red sea, and encamped in the
wilderness of Sin. 33:12 And they took their journey out of the wilderness of Sin, and
encamped in Dophkah. 33:13 And they departed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush. 33:14 And they removed from Alush, and encamped at Rephidim, where was
no water for the people to drink. 33:15 And they departed from Rephidim, and pitched in the wilderness
of Sinai. 33:16 And they removed from the desert of Sinai, and pitched at
Kibrothhattaavah. 33:17 And they departed from Kibrothhattaavah, and encamped at
Hazeroth. 33:18 And they departed from Hazeroth, and pitched in Rithmah. 33:19 And they departed from Rithmah, and pitched at Rimmonparez. 33:20 And they departed from Rimmonparez, and pitched in Libnah. 33:21 And they removed from Libnah, and pitched at Rissah. 33:22 And they journeyed from Rissah, and pitched in Kehelathah. 33:23 And they went from Kehelathah, and pitched in mount Shapher. 33:24 And they removed from mount Shapher, and encamped in Haradah. 33:25 And they removed from Haradah, and pitched in Makheloth. 33:26 And they removed from Makheloth, and encamped at Tahath. 33:27 And they departed from Tahath, and pitched at Tarah. 33:28 And they removed from Tarah, and pitched in Mithcah. 33:29 And they went from Mithcah, and pitched in Hashmonah. 33:30 And they departed from Hashmonah, and encamped at Moseroth. 33:31 And they departed from Moseroth, and pitched in Benejaakan. 33:32 And they removed from Benejaakan, and encamped at Horhagidgad. 33:33 And they went from Horhagidgad, and pitched in Jotbathah. 33:34 And they removed from Jotbathah, and encamped at Ebronah. 33:35 And they departed from Ebronah, and encamped at Eziongaber. 33:36 And they removed from Eziongaber, and pitched in the wilderness
of Zin, which is Kadesh. 33:37 And they removed from Kadesh, and pitched in mount Hor, in the
edge of the land of Edom. 33:38 And Aaron the priest went up into mount Hor at the commandment
of the LORD, and died there, in the fortieth year after the children
of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt, in the first day of the
fifth month. 33:39 And Aaron was an hundred and twenty and three years old when he
died in mount Hor. 33:40 And king Arad the Canaanite, which dwelt in the south in the
land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the children of Israel. 33:41 And they departed from mount Hor, and pitched in Zalmonah. 33:42 And they departed from Zalmonah, and pitched in Punon. 33:43 And they departed from Punon, and pitched in Oboth. 33:44 And they departed from Oboth, and pitched in Ijeabarim, in the
border of Moab. 33:45 And they departed from Iim, and pitched in Dibongad. 33:46 And they removed from Dibongad, and encamped in Almondiblathaim. 33:47 And they removed from Almondiblathaim, and pitched in the
mountains of Abarim, before Nebo. 33:48 And they departed from the mountains of Abarim, and pitched in
the plains of Moab by Jordan near Jericho. 33:49 And they pitched by Jordan, from Bethjesimoth even unto
Abelshittim in the plains of Moab. 33:50 And the LORD spake unto Moses in the plains of Moab by Jordan
near Jericho, saying, 33:51 Speak unto the children of Israel, and say
unto them, When ye are passed over Jordan into the land of Canaan;
33:52 Then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from
before you, and destroy all their pictures, and destroy all their
molten images, and quite pluck down all their high places: 33:53 And
ye shall dispossess the inhabitants of the land, and dwell therein:
for I have given you the land to possess it. 33:54 And ye shall divide the land by lot for an inheritance among
your families: and to the more ye shall give the more inheritance, and
to the fewer ye shall give the less inheritance: every man's
inheritance shall be in the place where his lot falleth; according to
the tribes of your fathers ye shall inherit. 33:55 But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from
before you; then it shall come to pass, that those which ye let remain
of them shall be pricks in your eyes, and thorns in your sides, and
shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell. 33:56 Moreover it shall come to pass, that I shall do unto you, as I
thought to do unto them. 34:1 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 34:2 Command the children
of Israel, and say unto them, When ye come into the land of Canaan;
(this is the land that shall fall unto you for an inheritance, even
the land of Canaan with the coasts thereof:) 34:3 Then your south
quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the coast of
Edom, and your south border shall be the outmost coast of the salt sea
eastward: 34:4 And your border shall turn from the south to the ascent
of Akrabbim, and pass on to Zin: and the going forth thereof shall be
from the south to Kadeshbarnea, and shall go on to Hazaraddar, and
pass on to Azmon: 34:5 And the border shall fetch a compass from Azmon
unto the river of Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea. 34:6 And as for the western border, ye shall even have the great sea
for a border: this shall be your west border. 34:7 And this shall be your north border: from the great sea ye shall
point out for you mount Hor: 34:8 From mount Hor ye shall point out
your border unto the entrance of Hamath; and the goings forth of the
border shall be to Zedad: 34:9 And the border shall go on to Ziphron,
and the goings out of it shall be at Hazarenan: this shall be your
north border. 34:10 And ye shall point out your east border from Hazarenan to
Shepham: 34:11 And the coast shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on
the east side of Ain; and the border shall descend, and shall reach
unto the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward: 34:12 And the border
shall go down to Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the salt
sea: this shall be your land with the coasts thereof round about. 34:13 And Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying, This is the
land which ye shall inherit by lot, which the LORD commanded to give
unto the nine tribes, and to the half tribe: 34:14 For the tribe of
the children of Reuben according to the house of their fathers, and
the tribe of the children of Gad according to the house of their
fathers, have received their inheritance; and half the tribe of
Manasseh have received their inheritance: 34:15 The two tribes and the
half tribe have received their inheritance on this side Jordan near
Jericho eastward, toward the sunrising. 34:16 And the LORD spake unto Moses, saying, 34:17 These are the names
of the men which shall divide the land unto you: Eleazar the priest,
and Joshua the son of Nun. 34:18 And ye shall take one prince of every tribe, to divide the land
by inheritance. 34:19 And the names of the men are these: Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb
the son of Jephunneh. 34:20 And of the tribe of the children of Simeon, Shemuel the son of
Ammihud. 34:21 Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon. 34:22 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Dan, Bukki the
son of Jogli. 34:23 The prince of the children of Joseph, for the tribe of the
children of Manasseh, Hanniel the son of Ephod. 34:24 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, Kemuel
the son of Shiphtan. 34:25 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Zebulun,
Elizaphan the son of Parnach. 34:26 And the prince of the tribe of the children of Issachar, Paltiel
the son of Azzan.