If there bee
any in this Assembly, any deere Friend of Caesars, to him
I say, that Brutus loue to Caesar, was no lesse then his. If
then, that Friend demand, why Brutus rose against Caesar,
this is my answer: Not that I lou'd Caesar lesse, but
that I lou'd Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were liuing,
and dye all Slaues; then that Caesar were dead, to
liue all Free-men? As Caesar lou'd mee, I weepe for him;
as he was Fortunate, I reioyce at it; as he was Valiant, I
honour him: But, as he was Ambitious, I slew him. There
is Teares, for his Loue: Ioy, for his Fortune: Honor, for
his Valour: and Death, for his Ambition. Who is heere
so base, that would be a Bondman? If any, speak, for him
haue I offended. Who is heere so rude, that would not
be a Roman? If any, speak, for him haue I offended. Who
is heere so vile, that will not loue his Countrey? If any,
speake, for him haue I offended. I pause for a Reply

   All. None Brutus, none

   Brutus. Then none haue I offended. I haue done no
more to Caesar, then you shall do to Brutus. The Question
of his death, is inroll'd in the Capitoll: his Glory not
extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offences enforc'd,
for which he suffered death. Enter Mark Antony, with Caesars body. Heere comes his Body, mourn'd by Marke Antony, who
though he had no hand in his death, shall receiue the benefit
of his dying, a place in the Co[m]monwealth, as which
of you shall not. With this I depart, that as I slewe my
best Louer for the good of Rome, I haue the same Dagger
for my selfe, when it shall please my Country to need
my death

   All. Liue Brutus, liue, liue

   1. Bring him with Triumph home vnto his house

   2. Giue him a Statue with his Ancestors

   3. Let him be Caesar

   4. Caesars better parts,
Shall be Crown'd in Brutus

   1. Wee'l bring him to his House,
With Showts and Clamors

   Bru. My Country-men

   2. Peace, silence, Brutus speakes

   1. Peace ho

   Bru. Good Countrymen, let me depart alone,
And (for my sake) stay heere with Antony:
Do grace to Caesars Corpes, and grace his Speech
Tending to Caesars Glories, which Marke Antony
(By our permission) is allow'd to make. I do intreat you, not a man depart,
Saue I alone, till Antony haue spoke. Exit

  1 Stay ho, and let vs heare Mark Antony

   3 Let him go vp into the publike Chaire,
Wee'l heare him: Noble Antony go vp

   Ant. For Brutus sake, I am beholding to you

   4 What does he say of Brutus? 3 He sayes, for Brutus sake
He findes himselfe beholding to vs all

   4 'Twere best he speake no harme of Brutus heere? 1 This Caesar was a Tyrant

   3 Nay that's certaine:
We are blest that Rome is rid of him

   2 Peace, let vs heare what Antony can say

   Ant. You gentle Romans

   All. Peace hoe, let vs heare him

   An. Friends, Romans, Countrymen, lend me your ears:
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him:
The euill that men do, liues after them,
The good is oft enterred with their bones,
So let it be with Caesar. The Noble Brutus,
Hath told you Caesar was Ambitious:
If it were so, it was a greeuous Fault,
And greeuously hath Caesar answer'd it. Heere, vnder leaue of Brutus, and the rest
(For Brutus is an Honourable man,
So are they all; all Honourable men)
Come I to speake in Caesars Funerall. He was my Friend, faithfull, and iust to me;
But Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious,
And Brutus is an Honourable man. He hath brought many Captiues home to Rome,
Whose Ransomes, did the generall Coffers fill:
Did this in Caesar seeme Ambitious? When that the poore haue cry'de, Caesar hath wept:
Ambition should be made of sterner stuffe,
Yet Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious:
And Brutus is an Honourable man. You all did see, that on the Lupercall,
I thrice presented him a Kingly Crowne,
Which he did thrice refuse. Was this Ambition? Yet Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious:
And sure he is an Honourable man. I speake not to disprooue what Brutus spoke,
But heere I am, to speake what I do know;
You all did loue him once, not without cause,
What cause with-holds you then, to mourne for him? O Iudgement! thou are fled to brutish Beasts,
And Men haue lost their Reason. Beare with me,
My heart is in the Coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pawse, till it come backe to me

   1 Me thinkes there is much reason in his sayings

   2 If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar ha's had great wrong

   3 Ha's hee Masters? I feare there will a worse come in his place

   4. Mark'd ye his words? he would not take y Crown,
Therefore 'tis certaine, he was not Ambitious

   1. If it be found so, some will deere abide it

   2. Poore soule, his eyes are red as fire with weeping

   3. There's not a Nobler man in Rome then Antony

   4. Now marke him, he begins againe to speake

   Ant. But yesterday, the word of Caesar might
Haue stood against the World: Now lies he there,
And none so poore to do him reuerence. O Maisters! If I were dispos'd to stirre
Your hearts and mindes to Mutiny and Rage,
I should do Brutus wrong, and Cassius wrong:
Who (you all know) are Honourable men. I will not do them wrong: I rather choose
To wrong the dead, to wrong my selfe and you,
Then I will wrong such Honourable men. But heere's a Parchment, with the Seale of Caesar,
I found it in his Closset, 'tis his Will:
Let but the Commons heare this Testament:
(Which pardon me) I do not meane to reade,
And they would go and kisse dead Caesars wounds,
And dip their Napkins in his Sacred Blood;
Yea, begge a haire of him for Memory,
And dying, mention it within their Willes,
Bequeathing it as a rich Legacie
Vnto their issue

   4 Wee'l heare the Will, reade it Marke Antony

   All. The Will, the Will; we will heare Caesars Will

   Ant. Haue patience gentle Friends, I must not read it. It is not meete you know how Caesar lou'd you:
You are not Wood, you are not Stones, but men:
And being men, hearing the Will of Caesar,
It will inflame you, it will make you mad:
'Tis good you know not that you are his Heires,
For if you should, O what would come of it? 4 Read the Will, wee'l heare it Antony:
You shall reade vs the Will, Caesars Will

   Ant. Will you be Patient? Will you stay a-while? I haue o're-shot my selfe to tell you of it,
I feare I wrong the Honourable men,
Whose Daggers haue stabb'd Caesar: I do feare it

   4 They were Traitors: Honourable men? All. The Will, the Testament

   2 They were Villaines, Murderers: the Will, read the
Will

   Ant. You will compell me then to read the Will:
Then make a Ring about the Corpes of Caesar,
And let me shew you him that made the Will:
Shall I descend? And will you giue me leaue? All. Come downe

   2 Descend

   3 You shall haue leaue

   4 A Ring, stand round

   1 Stand from the Hearse, stand from the Body

   2 Roome for Antony, most Noble Antony

   Ant. Nay presse not so vpon me, stand farre off

   All. Stand backe: roome, beare backe

   Ant. If you haue teares, prepare to shed them now. You all do know this Mantle, I remember
The first time euer Caesar put it on,
'Twas on a Summers Euening in his Tent,
That day he ouercame the Neruij. Looke, in this place ran Cassius Dagger through:
See what a rent the enuious Caska made:
Through this, the wel-beloued Brutus stabb'd,
And as he pluck'd his cursed Steele away:
Marke how the blood of Caesar followed it,
As rushing out of doores, to be resolu'd
If Brutus so vnkindely knock'd, or no:
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesars Angel. Iudge, O you Gods, how deerely Caesar lou'd him:
This was the most vnkindest cut of all. For when the Noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude, more strong then Traitors armes,
Quite vanquish'd him: then burst his Mighty heart,
And in his Mantle, muffling vp his face,
Euen at the Base of Pompeyes Statue
(Which all the while ran blood) great Caesar fell. O what a fall was there, my Countrymen? Then I, and you, and all of vs fell downe,
Whil'st bloody Treason flourish'd ouer vs.
O now you weepe, and I perceiue you feele
The dint of pitty: These are gracious droppes. Kinde Soules, what weepe you, when you but behold
Our Caesars Vesture wounded? Looke you heere,
Heere is Himselfe, marr'd as you see with Traitors

   1. O pitteous spectacle! 2. O Noble Caesar! 3. O wofull day! 4. O Traitors, Villaines! 1. O most bloody sight! 2. We will be reueng'd: Reuenge
About, seeke, burne, fire, kill, slay,
Let not a Traitor liue

   Ant. Stay Country-men

   1. Peace there, heare the Noble Antony

   2. Wee'l heare him, wee'l follow him, wee'l dy with
him

   Ant. Good Friends, sweet Friends, let me not stirre you vp
To such a sodaine Flood of Mutiny:
They that haue done this Deede, are honourable.