So, I am free,
Yet would not so haue beene
Durst I haue done my will. O Cassius,
Farre from this Country Pindarus shall run,
Where neuer Roman shall take note of him. Enter Titinius and Messala. Messa. It is but change, Titinius: for Octauius
Is ouerthrowne by Noble Brutus power,
As Cassius Legions are by Antony

   Titin. These tydings will well comfort Cassius

   Messa. Where did you leaue him

   Titin. All disconsolate,
With Pindarus his Bondman, on this Hill

   Messa. Is not that he that lyes vpon the ground? Titin. He lies not like the Liuing. O my heart! Messa. Is not that hee? Titin. No, this was he Messala,
But Cassius is no more. O setting Sunne:
As in thy red Rayes thou doest sinke to night;
So in his red blood Cassius day is set. The Sunne of Rome is set. Our day is gone,
Clowds, Dewes, and Dangers come; our deeds are done:
Mistrust of my successe hath done this deed

   Messa. Mistrust of good successe hath done this deed. O hatefull Error, Melancholies Childe:
Why do'st thou shew to the apt thoughts of men
The things that are not? O Error soone conceyu'd,
Thou neuer com'st vnto a happy byrth,
But kil'st the Mother that engendred thee

   Tit. What Pindarus? Where art thou Pindarus? Messa. Seeke him Titinius, whilst I go to meet
The Noble Brutus, thrusting this report
Into his eares; I may say thrusting it:
For piercing Steele, and Darts inuenomed,
Shall be as welcome to the eares of Brutus,
As tydings of this sight

   Tit. Hye you Messala,
And I will seeke for Pindarus the while:
Why did'st thou send me forth braue Cassius? Did I not meet thy Friends, and did not they
Put on my Browes this wreath of Victorie,
And bid me giue it thee? Did'st thou not heare their showts? Alas, thou hast misconstrued euery thing. But hold thee, take this Garland on thy Brow,
Thy Brutus bid me giue it thee, and I
Will do his bidding. Brutus, come apace,
And see how I regarded Caius Cassius:
By your leaue Gods: This is a Romans part,
Come Cassius Sword, and finde Titinius hart. Dies

Alarum. Enter Brutus, Messala, yong Cato, Strato, Volumnius, and
Lucillius. Bru. Where, where Messala, doth his body lye? Messa. Loe yonder, and Titinius mourning it

   Bru. Titinius face is vpward

   Cato. He is slaine

   Bru. O Iulius Caesar, thou art mighty yet,
Thy Spirit walkes abroad, and turnes our Swords
In our owne proper Entrailes. Low Alarums

   Cato. Braue Titinius,
Looke where he haue not crown'd dead Cassius

   Bru. Are yet two Romans liuing such as these? The last of all the Romans, far thee well:
It is impossible, that euer Rome
Should breed thy fellow. Friends I owe mo teares
To this dead man, then you shall see me pay. I shall finde time, Cassius: I shall finde time. Come therefore, and to Tharsus send his body,
His Funerals shall not be in our Campe,
Least it discomfort vs. Lucillius come,
And come yong Cato, let vs to the Field,
Labio and Flauio set our Battailes on:
'Tis three a clocke, and Romans yet ere night,
We shall try Fortune in a second fight. Exeunt. Alarum. Enter Brutus, Messala, Cato, Lucillius, and Flauius. Bru. Yet Country-men: O yet, hold vp your heads

   Cato. What Bastard doth not? Who will go with me? I will proclaime my name about the Field. I am the Sonne of Marcus Cato, hoe. A Foe to Tyrants, and my Countries Friend. I am the Sonne of Marcus Cato, hoe. Enter Souldiers, and fight. And I am Brutus, Marcus Brutus, I,
Brutus my Countries Friend: Know me for Brutus

   Luc. O yong and Noble Cato, art thou downe? Why now thou dyest, as brauely as Titinius,
And may'st be honour'd, being Cato's Sonne

   Sold. Yeeld, or thou dyest

   Luc. Onely I yeeld to dye:
There is so much, that thou wilt kill me straight:
Kill Brutus, and be honour'd in his death

   Sold. We must not: a Noble Prisoner. Enter Antony. 2.Sold. Roome hoe: tell Antony, Brutus is tane

   1.Sold. Ile tell thee newes. Heere comes the Generall,
Brutus is tane, Brutus is tane my Lord

   Ant. Where is hee? Luc. Safe Antony, Brutus is safe enough:
I dare assure thee, that no Enemy
Shall euer take aliue the Noble Brutus:
The Gods defend him from so great a shame,
When you do finde him, or aliue, or dead,
He will be found like Brutus, like himselfe

   Ant. This is not Brutus friend, but I assure you,
A prize no lesse in worth; keepe this man safe,
Giue him all kindnesse. I had rather haue
Such men my Friends, then Enemies. Go on,
And see where Brutus be aliue or dead,
And bring vs word, vnto Octauius Tent:
How euery thing is chanc'd. Exeunt. Enter Brutus, Dardanius, Clitus, Strato, and Volumnius. Brut. Come poore remaines of friends, rest on this
Rocke

   Clit. Statillius shew'd the Torch-light, but my Lord
He came not backe: he is or tane, or slaine

   Brut. Sit thee downe, Clitus: slaying is the word,
It is a deed in fashion. Hearke thee, Clitus

   Clit. What I, my Lord? No, not for all the World

   Brut. Peace then, no words

   Clit. Ile rather kill my selfe

   Brut. Hearke thee, Dardanius

   Dard. Shall I doe such a deed? Clit. O Dardanius

   Dard. O Clitus

   Clit. What ill request did Brutus make to thee? Dard. To kill him, Clitus: looke he meditates

   Clit. Now is that Noble Vessell full of griefe,
That it runnes ouer euen at his eyes

   Brut. Come hither, good Volumnius, list a word

   Volum. What sayes my Lord? Brut.