come! we shall be late indeed," said Hal; "surely you've looked
long enough, Ben, at this blue and red window." "I'm only thinking about these coloured shadows," said Ben. "I can show you when we go home, Ben," said his uncle, "an entertaining
paper upon such shadows. "*

*Vide "Priestley's History of Vision," chapter on coloured shadows. "Hark!" cried Ben, "did you hear that noise?" They all listened; and
they heard a bird singing in the cathedral. "It's our old robin, sir," said the lad who had opened the cathedral door
for them. "Yes," said Mr. Gresham, "there he is, boys--look--perched upon the
organ; he often sits there, and sings, whilst the organ is playing." "And," continued the lad who showed the cathedral, "he has lived here
these many, many winters. They say he is fifteen years old; and he is so
tame, poor fellow! that if I had a bit of bread he'd come down and feed
in my hand." "I've a bit of bun here," cried Ben, joyfully, producing the remains of
the bun which Hal but an hour before would have thrown away. "Pray, let
us see the poor robin eat out of your hand." The lad crumbled the bun, and called to the robin, who fluttered and
chirped, and seemed rejoiced at the sight of the bread; but yet he did
not come down from his pinnacle on the organ. "He is afraid of US," said Ben; "he is not used to eat before strangers,
I suppose." "Ah, no, sir," said the young man, with a deep sigh, "that is not the
thing. He is used enough to eat afore company. Time was he'd have come
down for me before ever so many fine folks, and have eat his crumbs out
of my hand, at my first call; but, poor fellow! it's not his fault now. He does not know me now, sir, since my accident, because of this great
black patch." The young man put his hand to his right eye, which was
covered with a huge black patch. Ben asked what ACCIDENT he meant; and
the lad told him that, but a few weeks ago, he had lost the sight of his
eye by the stroke of a stone, which reached him as he was passing under
the rocks at Clifton unluckily when the workmen were blasting. "I don't
mind so much for myself, sir," said the lad; "but I can't work so well
now, as I used to do before my accident, for my old mother, who has had a
STROKE of the palsy; and I've a many little brothers and sisters not well
able yet to get their own livelihood, though they be as willing as
willing can be." "Where does your mother live?" said Mr. Gresham. "Hard by, sir, just close to the church here:  it was HER that always had
the showing of it to strangers, till she lost the use of her poor limbs." "Shall we, may we, uncle, go that way? This is the house; is not it?" said Ben, when they went out of the cathedral. They went into the house; it was rather a hovel than a house; but, poor
as it was, it was as neat as misery could make it. The old woman was
sitting up in her wretched bed, winding worsted; four meagre, ill-
clothed, pale children were all busy, some of them sticking pins in paper
for the pin-maker, and others sorting rags for the paper-maker. "What a horrid place it is!" said Hal, sighing; "I did not know there
were such shocking places in the world. I've often seen terrible-
looking, tumble-down places, as we drove through the town in mamma's
carriage; but then I did not know who lived in them; and I never saw the
inside of any of them. It is very dreadful, indeed, to think that people
are forced to live in this way. I wish mamma would send me some more
pocket-money, that I might do something for them. I had half a crown;
but," continued he, feeling in his pockets, "I'm afraid I spent the last
shilling of it this morning upon those cakes that made me sick. I wish I
had my shilling now, I'd give it to these poor people." Ben, though he was all this time silent, was as sorry as his talkative
cousin for all these poor people. But there was some difference between
the sorrow of these two boys. Hal, after he was again seated in the hackney-coach, and had rattled
through the busy streets of Bristol, for a few minutes quite forgot the
spectacle of misery which he had seen; and the gay shops in Wine Street
and the idea of his green and white uniform wholly occupied his
imagination. "Now for our uniforms!" cried he, as he jumped eagerly out of the coach,
when his uncle stopped at the woollen-draper's door. "Uncle," said Ben, stopping Mr. Gresham before he got out of the
carriage, "I don't think a uniform is at all necessary for me. I'm very
much obliged to you; but I would rather not have one. I have a very good
coat, and I think it would be waste." "Well, let me get out of the carriage, and we will see about it," said
Mr. Gresham; "perhaps the sight of the beautiful green and white cloth,
and the epaulettes (have you ever considered the epaulettes?) may tempt
you to change your mind." "Oh, no," said Ben, laughing; "I shall not change my mind,"

The green cloth, and the white cloth, and the epaulettes were produced,
to Hal's infinite satisfaction. His uncle took up a pen, and calculated
for a few minutes; then, showing the back of the letter, upon which he
was writing, to his nephews, "Cast up these sums, boys," said he, "and
tell me whether I am right." "Ben, do you do it," said Hal, a little embarrassed; "I am not quick at
figures." Ben WAS, and he went over his uncle's calculation very
expeditiously. "It is right, is it?" said Mr. Gresham. "Yes, sir, quite right." "Then, by this calculation, I find I could, for less than half the money
your uniforms would cost, purchase for each of you boys a warm great-
coat, which you will want, I have a notion, this winter upon the Downs." "Oh, sir," said Hal, with an alarmed look; "but it is not winter YET; it
is not cold weather YET. We sha'n't want greatcoats YET." "Don't you remember how cold we were, Hal, the day before yesterday, in
that sharp wind, when we were flying our kite upon the Downs? and winter
will come, though it is not come yet--I am sure, I should like to have a
good warm great-coat very much." Mr. Gresham took six guineas out of his purse and he placed three of them
before Hal, and three before Ben. "Young gentlemen," said he, "I believe
your uniforms would come to about three guineas a piece. Now I will lay
out this money for you just as you please. Hal, what say you?" "Why, sir," said Hal, "a great-coat is a good thing, to be sure; and
then, after the great-coat, as you said it would only cost half as much
as the uniform, there would be some money to spare, would not there?" "Yes, my dear, about five-and-twenty shillings." "Five-and-twenty shillings?--I could buy and do a great many things, to
be sure, with five-and-twenty shillings; but then, THE THING IS, I must
go without the uniform, if I have the great-coat." "Certainly," said his uncle. "Ah!" said Hal, sighing, as he looked at the epaulettes, "uncle, if you
would not be displeased, if I choose the uniform--"

"I shall not be displeased at your choosing whatever you like best," said
Mr. Gresham. "Well, then, thank you, sir," said Hal; "I think I had better have the
uniform, because, if I have not the uniform, now, directly, it will be of
no use to me, as the archery meeting is the week after next, you know;
and, as to the great-coat, perhaps between this time and the VERY cold
weather, which, perhaps, won't be till Christmas, papa will buy a great-
coat for me; and I'll ask mamma to give me some pocket money to give
away, and she will, perhaps." To all this conclusive, conditional
reasoning, which depended upon the word PERHAPS, three times repeated,
Mr. Gresham made no reply; but he immediately bought the uniform for Hal,
and desired that it should be sent to Lady Diana Sweepstakes' son's
tailor, to be made up. The measure of Hal's happiness was now complete. "And how am I to lay out the three guineas for you, Ben?" said Mr.
Gresham; "speak, what do you wish for first?" "A great-coat, uncle, if you please." Gresham bought the coat; and,
after it was paid for, five-and-twenty shillings of Ben's three guineas
remained. "What next, my boy?" said his uncle. "Arrows, uncle, if you please; three arrows." "My dear, I promised you a bow and arrows." "No, uncle, you only said a bow." "Well, I meant a bow and arrows. I'm glad you are so exact, however. It
is better to claim less than more than what is promised. The three
arrows you shall have. But go on; how shall I dispose of these five-and-
twenty shillings for you?" "In clothes, if you will be so good, uncle, for that poor boy who has the
great black patch on his eye." "I always believed," said Mr. Gresham, shaking hands with Ben, "that
economy and generosity were the best friends, instead of being enemies,
as some silly, extravagant people would have us think them. Choose the
poor, blind boy's coat, my dear nephew, and pay for it. There's no
occasion for my praising you about the matter. Your best reward is in
your own mind, child; and you want no other, or I'm mistaken. Now, jump
into the coach, boys, and let's be off. We shall be late, I'm afraid,"
continued he, as the coach drove on:  "but I must let you stop, Ben, with
your goods, at the poor boy's door." When they came to the house, Mr. Gresham opened the coach door, and Ben
jumped out with his parcel under his arm. "Stay, stay! you must take me with you," said his pleased uncle; "I like
to see people made happy, as well as you do." "And so do I, too," said Hal; "let me come with you.