I, and truly, you were best

   Cin. What is my name? Whether am I going? Where
do I dwell? Am I a married man, or a Batchellour? Then
to answer euery man, directly and breefely, wisely and
truly: wisely I say, I am a Batchellor

   2 That's as much as to say, they are fooles that marrie:
you'l beare me a bang for that I feare: proceede directly

   Cinna. Directly I am going to Caesars Funerall

   1. As a Friend, or an Enemy? Cinna. As a friend

   2. That matter is answered directly

   4. For your dwelling: breefely

   Cinna. Breefely, I dwell by the Capitoll

   3. Your name sir, truly

   Cinna. Truly, my name is Cinna

   1. Teare him to peeces, hee's a Conspirator

   Cinna. I am Cinna the Poet, I am Cinna the Poet

   4. Teare him for his bad verses, teare him for his bad
Verses

   Cin. I am not Cinna the Conspirator

   4. It is no matter, his name's Cinna, plucke but his
name out of his heart, and turne him going

   3. Teare him, tear him; Come Brands hoe, Firebrands:
to Brutus, to Cassius, burne all. Some to Decius House,
and some to Caska's; some to Ligarius: Away, go. Exeunt. all the Plebeians. Actus Quartus. Enter Antony, Octauius, and Lepidus. Ant. These many then shall die, their names are prickt
  Octa. Your Brother too must dye: consent you Lepidus? Lep. I do consent

   Octa. Pricke him downe Antony

   Lep. Vpon condition Publius shall not liue,
Who is your Sisters sonne, Marke Antony

   Ant. He shall not liue; looke, with a spot I dam him. But Lepidus, go you to Caesars house:
Fetch the Will hither, and we shall determine
How to cut off some charge in Legacies

   Lep. What? shall I finde you heere? Octa. Or heere, or at the Capitoll. Exit Lepidus

  Ant. This is a slight vnmeritable man,
Meet to be sent on Errands: is it fit
The three-fold World diuided, he should stand
One of the three to share it? Octa. So you thought him,
And tooke his voyce who should be prickt to dye
In our blacke Sentence and Proscription

   Ant. Octauius, I haue seene more dayes then you,
And though we lay these Honours on this man,
To ease our selues of diuers sland'rous loads,
He shall but beare them, as the Asse beares Gold,
To groane and swet vnder the Businesse,
Either led or driuen, as we point the way:
And hauing brought our Treasure, where we will,
Then take we downe his Load, and turne him off
(Like to the empty Asse) to shake his eares,
And graze in Commons

   Octa. You may do your will:
But hee's a tried, and valiant Souldier

   Ant. So is my Horse Octauius, and for that
I do appoint him store of Prouender. It is a Creature that I teach to fight,
To winde, to stop, to run directly on:
His corporall Motion, gouern'd by my Spirit,
And in some taste, is Lepidus but so:
He must be taught, and train'd, and bid go forth:
A barren spirited Fellow; one that feeds
On Obiects, Arts, and Imitations. Which out of vse, and stal'de by other men
Begin his fashion. Do not talke of him,
But as a property: and now Octauius,
Listen great things. Brutus and Cassius
Are leuying Powers; We must straight make head:
Therefore let our Alliance be combin'd,
Our best Friends made, our meanes stretcht,
And let vs presently go sit in Councell,
How couert matters may be best disclos'd,
And open Perils surest answered

   Octa. Let vs do so: for we are at the stake,
And bayed about with many Enemies,
And some that smile haue in their hearts I feare
Millions of Mischeefes. Exeunt. Drum. Enter Brutus, Lucillius, and the Army. Titinius and
Pindarus meete
them. Bru. Stand ho

   Lucil. Giue the word ho, and Stand

   Bru. What now Lucillius, is Cassius neere? Lucil. He is at hand, and Pindarus is come
To do you salutation from his Master

   Bru. He greets me well. Your Master Pindarus
In his owne change, or by ill Officers,
Hath giuen me some worthy cause to wish
Things done, vndone: But if he be at hand
I shall be satisfied

   Pin. I do not doubt
But that my Noble Master will appeare
Such as he is, full of regard, and Honour

   Bru. He is not doubted. A word Lucillius
How he receiu'd you: let me be resolu'd

   Lucil. With courtesie, and with respect enough,
But not with such familiar instances,
Nor with such free and friendly Conference
As he hath vs'd of old

   Bru. Thou hast describ'd
A hot Friend, cooling: Euer note Lucillius,
When Loue begins to sicken and decay
It vseth an enforced Ceremony. There are no trickes, in plaine and simple Faith:
But hollow men, like Horses hot at hand,
Make gallant shew, and promise of their Mettle:

Low March within. But when they should endure the bloody Spurre,
They fall their Crests, and like deceitfull Iades
Sinke in the Triall. Comes his Army on? Lucil. They meane this night in Sardis to be quarter'd:
The greater part, the Horse in generall
Are come with Cassius. Enter Cassius and his Powers. Bru. Hearke, he is arriu'd:
March gently on to meete him

   Cassi. Stand ho

   Bru. Stand ho, speake the word along. Stand. Stand. Stand

   Cassi. Most Noble Brother, you haue done me wrong

   Bru. Iudge me you Gods; wrong I mine Enemies? And if not so, how should I wrong a Brother

   Cassi. Brutus, this sober forme of yours, hides wrongs,
And when you do them-
  Brut. Cassius, be content,
Speake your greefes softly, I do know you well. Before the eyes of both our Armies heere
(Which should perceiue nothing but Loue from vs)
Let vs not wrangle. Bid them moue away:
Then in my Tent Cassius enlarge your Greefes,
And I will giue you Audience

   Cassi. Pindarus,
Bid our Commanders leade their Charges off
A little from this ground

   Bru. Lucillius, do you the like, and let no man
Come to our Tent, till we haue done our Conference. Let Lucius and Titinius guard our doore. Exeunt. Manet Brutus and Cassius. Cassi. That you haue wrong'd me, doth appear in this:
You haue condemn'd, and noted Lucius Pella
For taking Bribes heere of the Sardians;
Wherein my Letters, praying on his side,
Because I knew the man was slighted off

   Bru. You wrong'd your selfe to write in such a case

   Cassi. In such a time as this, it is not meet
That euery nice offence should beare his Comment

   Bru. Let me tell you Cassius, you your selfe
Are much condemn'd to haue an itching Palme,
To sell, and Mart your Offices for Gold
To Vndeseruers

   Cassi. I, an itching Palme? You know that you are Brutus that speakes this,
Or by the Gods, this speech were else your last

   Bru.