*

* Assai ben balla a chi fortuna suona. "Yes, no longer pipe, no longer dance," replied Francisco; and here they
parted; for Piedro walked away abruptly, much mortified to perceive that
his prosperity did not excite much envy, or command any additional
respect from Francisco. "I would rather," said Francisco, when he returned to Carlo and Rosetta,
who waited for him under the portico, where he left them--"I would rather
have such good friends as you, Carlo and Arthur, and some more I could
name, and, besides that, have a clear conscience, and work honestly for
my bread, than be as lucky as Piedro. Do you know he has found a
treasure, he says, in his father's garden--a vase full of gold? He
showed me one of the gold pieces." "Much good may they do him. I hope he came honestly by them," said
Carlo; "but ever since the affair of the double measure, I suspect
double-dealing always from him. It is not our affair, however. Let him
make himself happy his way, and we ours. "He that would live in peace and rest,
      Must hear, and see, and say the best." *

* Odi, vedi, taci, se vuoi viver in pace. All Piedro's neighbours did not follow this peaceable maxim; for when he
and his father began to circulate the story of the treasure found in the
garden, the village of Resina did not give them implicit faith. People
nodded and whispered, and shrugged their shoulders; then crossed
themselves, and declared that they would not, for all the riches of
Naples, change places with either Piedro or his father. Regardless, or
pretending to be regardless, of these suspicions, Piedro and his father
persisted in their assertions. The fishing-nets were sold, and
everything in their cottage was disposed of; they left Resina, went to
live at Naples, and, after a few weeks, the matter began to be almost
forgotten in the village. The old gardener, Francisco's father, was one of those who endeavoured to
THINK THE BEST; and all that he said upon the subject was, that he would
not exchange Francisco the Honest for Piedro the Lucky; that one can't
judge of the day till one sees the evening as well as the morning. *

* La vita il fine,--e di loda la sera. "Compute the morn and evening of their day."--Pope. Not to leave our readers longer in suspense, we must inform them that the
peasants of Resina were right in their suspicions. Piedro had never
found any treasure in his father's garden, but he came by his gold in the
following manner:--

After he was banished from the little wood-market for stealing Rosetta's
basketful of wood, after he had cheated the poor woman, who let glasses
out to hire, out of the value of the glasses which he broke, and, in
short, after he had entirely lost his credit with all who knew him, he
roamed about the streets of Naples, reckless of what became of him. He found the truth of the proverb, "that credit lost is like a Venice
glass broken--it can't be mended again." The few shillings which he had
in his pocket supplied him with food for a few days. At last he was glad
to be employed by one of the peasants who came to Naples to load their
asses with manure out of the streets. They often follow very early in
the morning, or during the night-time, the trace of carriages that are
gone, or that are returning from the opera; and Piedro was one night at
this work, when the horses of a nobleman's carriage took fright at the
sudden blaze of some fireworks. The carriage was overturned near him; a
lady was taken out of it, and was hurried by her attendants into a shop,
where she stayed till her carriage was set to rights. She was too much
alarmed for the first ten minutes after her accident to think of
anything; but after some time, she perceived that she had lost a valuable
diamond cross, which she had worn that night at the opera. She was
uncertain where she had dropped it; the shop, the carriage, the street,
were searched for it in vain. Piedro saw it fall as the lady was lifted out of the carriage, seized
upon it, and carried it off. Ignorant as he was of the full value of
what he had stolen, he knew not how to satisfy himself as to this point,
without trusting someone with the secret. After some hesitation, he determined to apply to a Jew, who, as it was
whispered, was ready to buy everything that was offered to him for sale,
without making any TROUBLESOME inquiries. It was late; he waited till
the streets were cleared, and then knocked softly at the back door of the
Jew's house. The person who opened the door for Piedro was his own
father. Piedro started back; but his father had fast hold of him. "What brings you here?" said the father, in a low voice, a voice which
expressed fear and rage mixed. "Only to ask my way--my shortest way," stammered Piedro. "No equivocations! Tell me what brings you here at this time of the
night? I WILL know." Piedro, who felt himself in his father's grasp, and who knew that his
father would certainly search him, to find out what he had brought to
sell, thought it most prudent to produce the diamond cross. His father
could but just see its lustre by the light of a dim lamp, which hung over
their heads in the gloomy passage in which they stood. "You would have been duped, if you had gone to sell this to the Jew. It
is well it has fallen into my hands. How came you by it?" Piedro
answered that he had found it in the street. "Go your ways home, then,"
said his father; "it is safe with me. Concern yourself no more about
it." Piedro was not inclined thus to relinquish his booty, and he now thought
proper to vary in his account of the manner in which he found the cross. He now confessed that it had dropped from the dress of a lady, whose
carriage was overturned as she was coming home from the opera, and he
concluded by saying that, if his father took his prize from him without
giving him his share of the profits, he would go directly to the shop
where the lady stopped whilst her servants were raising the carriage, and
that he would give notice of his having found the cross. Piedro's father saw that his SMART son, though scarcely sixteen years of
age, was a match for him in villainy. He promised him that he should
have half of whatever the Jew would give for the diamonds, and Piedro
insisted upon being present at the transaction. We do not wish to lay open to our young readers scenes of iniquity. It
is sufficient to say that the Jew, who was a man old in all the arts of
villainy, contrived to cheat both his associates, and obtained the
diamond cross for less than half its value. The matter was managed so
that the transaction remained undiscovered. The lady who lost the cross,
after making fruitless inquiries, gave up the search, and Piedro and his
father rejoiced in the success of their manoeuvres. It is said, that "Ill gotten wealth is quickly spent"; * and so it proved
in this instance. Both father and son lived a riotous life as long as
their money lasted, and it did not last many months. What his bad
education began, bad company finished, and Piedro's mind was completely
ruined by the associates with whom he became connected during what he
called his PROSPERITY. When his money was at an end, these unprincipled
friends began to look cold upon him, and at last plainly told him--"If
you mean to LIVE WITH US, you must LIVE AS WE DO." They lived by
robbery. * Vien presto consumato l'ingiustamente acquistato. Piedro, though familiarized to the idea of fraud, was shocked at the
thought of becoming a robber by profession. How difficult it is to stop
in the career of vice! Whether Piedro had power to stop, or whether he
was hurried on by his associates, we shall, for the present, leave in
doubt. CHAPTER IV

We turn with pleasure from Piedro the Cunning to Francisco the Honest. Francisco continued the happy and useful course of his life. By his
unremitting perseverance, he improved himself rapidly under the
instructions of his master and friend, Signor Camillo; his friend, we
say, for the fair and open character of Francisco won, or rather earned,
the friendship of this benevolent artist. The English gentleman seemed
to take a pride in our hero's success and good conduct. He was not one
of those patrons who think that they have done enough when they have
given five guineas. His servant Arthur always considered every generous
action of his master's as his own, and was particularly pleased whenever
this generosity was directed towards Francisco. As for Carlo and the little Rosetta, they were the companions of all the
pleasant walks which Francisco used to take in the cool of the evening,
after he had been shut up all day at his work. And the old carpenter,
delighted with the gratitude of his pupil, frequently repeated--"that he
was proud to have given the first instructions to such a GENIUS; and that
he had always prophesied Francisco would be a GREAT man." "And a good man, papa," said Rosetta; "for though he has grown so great,
and though he goes into palaces now, to say nothing of that place
underground, where he has leave to go, yet, notwithstanding all this, he
never forgets my brother Carlo and you." "That's the way to have good friends," said the carpenter. "And I like
his way; he does more than he says. Facts are masculine, and words are
feminine." *

* I fatti sono maschii, le parole femmine. These goods friends seemed to make Francisco happier than Piedro could be
made by his stolen diamonds. One morning, Francisco was sent to finish a sketch of the front of an
ancient temple, amongst the ruins of Herculaneum. He had just reached
the pit, and the men were about to let him down with cords, in the usual
manner, when his attention was caught by the shrill sound of a scolding
woman's voice. He looked, and saw at some paces distant this female
fury, who stood guarding the windlass of a well, to which, with
threatening gestures and most voluble menaces, she forbade all access. The peasants--men, women and children, who had come with their pitchers
to draw water at this well--were held at bay by the enraged female. Not
one dared to be the first to advance; whilst she grasped with one hand
the handle of the windlass, and, with the other tanned muscular arm
extended, governed the populace, bidding them remember that she was
padrona, or mistress of the well. They retired, in hopes of finding a
more gentle padrona at some other well in the neighbourhood; and the
fury, when they were out of sight, divided the long black hair which hung
over her face, and, turning to one of the spectators, appealed to them in
a sober voice, and asked if she was not right in what she had done? "I,
that am padrona of the well," said she, addressing herself to Francisco,
who, with great attention, was contemplating her with the eye of a
painter--"I, that am padrona of the well, must in times of scarcity do
strict justice, and preserve for ourselves alone the water of our well. There is scarcely enough even for ourselves. I have been obliged to make
my husband lengthen the ropes every day for this week past. If things go
on at this rate, there will soon be not one drop of water left in my
well." "Nor in any of the wells of the neighbourhood," added one of the workmen,
who was standing by; and he mentioned several in which the water had
lately suddenly decreased; and a miller affirmed that his mill had
stopped for want of water. Francisco was struck by these remarks. They brought to his recollection
similar facts, which he had often heard his father mention in his
childhood, as having been observed previous to the last eruption of Mount
Vesuvius. *  He had also heard from his father, in his childhood, that it
is better to trust to prudence than to fortune; and therefore, though the
peasants and workmen, to whom he mentioned his fears, laughed, and said,
"That as the burning mountain had been favourable to them for so many
years, they would trust to it and St.  Januarius one day longer," yet
Francisco immediately gave up all thoughts of spending this day amidst
the ruins of Herculaneum. After having inquired sufficiently, after
having seen several wells, in which the water had evidently decreased,
and after having seen the mill-wheels that were standing still for want
of their usual supply, he hastened home to his father and mother,
reported what he had heard and seen, and begged of them to remove, and to
take what things of value they could to some distance from the dangerous
spot where they now resided. * Phil. Trans. vol. ix. Some of the inhabitants of Resina, whom he questioned, declared that they
had heard strange rumbling noises underground; and a peasant and his son,
who had been at work the preceding day in a vineyard, a little above the
village, related that they had seen a sudden puff of smoke come out of
the earth, close to them; and that they had, at the same time, heard a
noise like the going off of a pistol. *

* These facts are mentioned in Sir William Hamilton's account of an
eruption of Mount Vesuvius.--See Phil. Trans.