Now, indeed, I know
that, without being avaricious, we may want, and wish for money. (Landlady's voice heard behind the scenes.) Landlady. Waiter!--Miss Bursal's curricle, and Mr. Bursal's vis-a-vis. Run! see that the Dolphin's empty. I say run!--run! Mrs. Talb. I will rest for a few moments upon the sofa, in this
bedchamber, before we set off. Louisa (goes to open the door). They have bolted or locked it. How
unlucky! (She turns the key, and tries to unlock the door.) Enter WAITER. Waiter. Ladies, I'm sorry--Miss Bursal and Mr. Bursal are come--just
coming upstairs. Mrs. Talb. Then, will you be so good, sir, as to unlock this door? (Waiter tries to unlock the door.) Waiter. It must be bolted on the inside. Chambermaid! Sally! Are you
within there? Unbolt this door. Mr. Bursal's voice behind the scenes. Mr. Burs. Let me have a basin of good soup directly. Waiter. I'll go round and have the door unbolted immediately, ladies. (Exit Waiter.) Enter MISS BURSAL, in a riding dress, and with a long whip. Miss Bursal. Those creatures, the ponies, have a'most pulled my 'and
off. Who 'ave we 'ere? Ha! Mrs. Talbot! Louisa, 'ow are ye? I'm so
vastly glad to see you; but I'm so shocked to 'ear of the loss of the
Bombay Castle. Mrs. Talbot, you look but poorly; but this Montem will
put everybody in spirits. I 'ear everybody's to be 'ere; and my brother
tells me, 'twill be the finest ever seen at HEton. Louisa, my dear, I'm
sorry I've not a seat for you in my curricle for to-morrow; but I've
promised Lady Betty; so, you know, 'tis impossible for me. Louisa. Certainly; and it would be impossible for me to leave my mother
at present. Chambermaid (opens the bedchamber door). The room's ready now, ladies. Mrs. Talb. Miss Bursal, we intrude upon you no longer. Miss Burs. Nay, why do you decamp, Mrs. Talbot? I 'ad a thousand things
to say to you, Louisa; but am so tired and so annoyed--

         (Seats herself. Exeunt Mrs. Talbot, Louisa and Chambermaid.) Enter MR. BURSAL, with a basin of soup in his hand. Mr. Burs. Well, thank my stars the Airly Castle is safe in the Downs. Miss Burs. Mr. Bursal, can you inform me why Joe, my groom, does not
make his appearance? Mr. Burs. (eating and speaking). Yes, that I can, child; because he is
with his 'orses, where he ought to be. 'Tis fit they should be looked
after well; for they cost me a pretty penny--more than their heads are
worth, and yours into the bargain; but I was resolved, as we were to come
to this Montem, to come in style. Miss Burs. In style, to be sure; for all the world's to be here--the
King, the Prince of WHales, and Duke o' York, and all the first people;
and we shall cut a dash! Dash! dash! will be the word to-morrow!--
(playing with her whip). Mr. Burs. (aside). Dash! dash! ay, just like her brother. He'll pay
away finely, I warrant, by the time he's her age. Well, well, he can
afford it; and I do love to see my children make a figure for their
money. As Jack Bursal says, what's money for, if it e'nt to make a
figure. (Aloud). There's your, brother Jack, now. The extravagant dog! he'll have such a dress as never was seen, I suppose, at this here
Montem. Why, now, Jack Bursal spends more money at Eton, and has more to
spend, than my Lord John, though my Lord John's the son of a marchioness. Miss Burs. Oh, that makes no difference nowadays. I wonder whether her
ladyship is to be at this Montem. The only good I ever got out of these
stupid Talbots was an introduction to their friend Lady Piercefield. What she could find to like in the Talbots, heaven knows. I've a notion
she'll drop them, when she hears of the loss of the Bombay Castle. Enter a WAITER, with a note. Waiter. A note from my Lady Piercefield, sir. Miss B. Charming woman! Is she here, pray, sir? Waiter. Just come. Yes, ma'am. (Exit Waiter.) Miss B. Well, Mr. Bursal, what is it? Mr. B. (reads). "Business of importance to communicate--"  Hum! what can
it be?--(going). Miss B. (aside). Perhaps some match to propose for me! (Aloud). Mr.
Bursal, pray before you go to her ladyship, do send my OOMAN to me to
make me presentable. (Exit Miss Bursal at one door.) Mr. B. (at the opposite door). "Business of importance!" Hum! I'm glad
I'm prepared with a good basin of soup. There's no doing business well
upon an empty stomach. Perhaps the business is to lend cash; and I've no
great stomach for that. But it will be an honour, to be sure. (Exit.) SCENE III. Landlady's Parlour. LANDLADY--MR. FINSBURY, a man-milliner, with bandboxes--a fancy cap, or
helmet, with feathers, in the Landlady's hand--a satin bag, covered with
gold netting, in the man-milliner's hand--a mantle hanging over his arm. A rough looking Farmer is sitting with his back towards them, eating
bread and cheese, and reading a newspaper. Landlady. Well, this, to be sure, will be the best dressed Montem that
ever was seen at Eton; and you Lon'on gentlemen have the most
fashionablest notions; and this is the most elegantest fancy cap--

Finsbury. Why, as you observe, ma'm, that is the most elegant fancy cap
of them all. That is Mr. Hector Hogmorton's fancy cap, ma'm; and here,
ma'm, is Mr. Saul's rich satin bag, covered with gold net. He is college
salt bearer, I understand, and has a prodigious superb white and gold
dress. But, in my humble opinion, ma'm, the marshal's white and purple
and orange fancy dress, trimmed with silver, will bear the bell; though,
indeed, I shouldn't say that,--for the colonel's and lieutenant's, and
ensign's, are beautiful in the extreme. And, to be sure, nothing could
be better imagined than Mr. Marlborough's lilac and silver, with a Roman
cap. And it must be allowed that nothing in nature can have a better
effect than Mr. Drake's flesh-colour and blue, with this Spanish hat,
ma'm, you see. (The farmer looks over his shoulder from time to time during this speech,
with contempt.) Farmer (reads the newspaper). French fleet at sea--Hum! Landlady. O gemini:  Mr. Drake's Spanish hat is the sweetest, tastiest
thing! Mr. Finsbury, I protest--

Finsb. Why, ma'm, I knew a lady of your taste couldn't but approve of
it. My own invention entirely, ma'm. But it's nothing to the captain's
cap, ma'm. Indeed, ma'm, Mr. Wheeler, the captain that is to be, has the
prettiest taste in dress. To be sure, his sandals were my suggestion;
but the mantle he has the entire credit of, to do him justice; and when
you see it, ma'm, you will be really surprised; for (for contrast, and
elegance, and richness, and lightness, and propriety, and effect, and
costume) you've never yet seen anything at all to be compared to Captain
Wheeler's mantle, ma'm. Farmer (to the Landlady). Why, now, pray, Mrs. Landlady, how long may it
have been the fashion for milliners to go about in men's clothes? Landlady (aside to Farmer). Lord, Mr. Hearty, hush! This is Mr.
Finsbury, the great man-milliner. Farm. The great man-milliner! This is a sight I never thought to see in
Old England. Finsb. (packing up band boxes). Well, ma'm, I'm glad I have your
approbation. It has ever been my study to please the ladies. Farm. (throws a fancy mantle over his frieze coat). And is this the way
to please the ladies, Mrs. Landlady, nowadays? Finsb. (taking off the mantle). Sir, with your leave--I ask pardon--but
the least thing detriments these tender colours; and as you have just
been eating cheese with your hands--

Farm. 'Tis my way to eat cheese with my mouth, man. Finsb. MAN! Farm. I ask pardon--man-milliner, I mean. Enter LANDLORD. Landlord. Why, wife! Landlady. Wife! Landlord. I ask pardon--Mrs. Newington, I mean. Do you know who them
ladies are that you have been and turned out of the Dolphin? Landlady (alarmed). Not I, indeed. Who are they, pray? Why, if they
are quality it's no fault of mine. It is their own fault for coming,
like scrubs, without four horses. Why, if quality will travel the road
this way, incognito, how can they expect to be known and treated as
quality? 'Tis no fault of mine. Why didn't you find out sooner who they
were, Mr. Newington? What else, in the 'versal world have you to do, but
to go basking about in the yards and places with your tankard in your
hand, from morning till night? What have you else to ruminate, all day
long, but to find out who's who, I say? Farm. Clapper! clapper! clapper! like my mill in a high wind, landlord. Clapper! clapper! clapper!--enough to stun a body. Landlord. That is not used to it; but use is all, they say. Landlady. Will you answer me, Mr. Newington? Who are the grandees that
were in the Dolphin?--and what's become on them? Landlord. Grandees was your own word, wife. They be not to call
grandees; but I reckon you'd be sorry not to treat 'em civil, when I tell
you their name is Talbot, mother and sister to our young Talbot, of Eton;
he that paid me so handsome for the hunter this very morning. Landlady. Mercy! is that all? What a combustion for nothing in life! Finsb. For nothing in life, as you say, ma'm; that is, nothing in high
life, I'm sure, ma'm; nay, I dare a'most venture to swear. Would you
believe it, Mr. Talbot is one of the few young gentlemen of Eton that has
not bespoke from me a fancy dress for this grand Montem? Landlady. There, Mr. Newington; there's your Talbot for you! and there's
your grandees! O trust me, I know your scrubs at first sight. Landlord. Scrubs, I don't, nor can't, nor won't call them that pay their
debts honestly. Scrubs, I don't, nor won't, nor can't, call them that
behave as handsome as young Mr. Talbot did here to me this morning about
the hunter. A scrub he is not, wife. Fancy-dress or no fancy-dress, Mr.
Finsbury, this young gentleman is no scrub. Finsb. Dear me! 'Twas not I said SCRUB. Did I say scrub? Farm. No matter if you did. Finsb. No matter, certainly; and yet it is a matter; for I'm confident I
wouldn't for the world leave it in anyone's power to say that I said--
that I called--any young gentleman of Eton a SCRUB! Why, you know, sir,
it might breed a riot! Farm. And a pretty figure you'd make in a riot! Landlady. Pray let me hear nothing about riots in my house. Farm. Nor about scrubs. Finsb. But I beg leave to explain, gentlemen. All I ventured to remark
or suggest was, that as there was some talk of Mr. Talbot's being captain
to-morrow, I didn't conceive how he could well appear without any dress. That was all, upon my word and honour. A good morning to you, gentlemen;
it is time for me to be off. Mrs. Newington, you were so obliging as to
promise to accommodate me with a return chaise as far as Eton. (Finsbury bows and exit.) Farm. A good day to you and your bandboxes. There's a fellow for you
now! Ha! ha! ha!--A man-milliner, forsooth! Landlord. Mrs. Talbot's coming--stand back. Landlady. Lord! why does Bob show them through this way? Enter MRS. TALBOT, leaning on LOUISA; Waiter showing the way. Landlady. You are going on, I suppose, ma'am? Waiter (aside to Landlord). Not if she could help it; but there's no
beds, since Mr. Bursal and Miss Bursal's come. Landlord. I say nothing, for it is vain to say more. But isn't it a
pity she can't stay for the Montem, poor old lady! Her son--as good and
fine a lad as ever you saw--they say, has a chance, too, of being
captain. She may never live to see another such a sight. (As Mrs. Talbot walks slowly on, the Farmer puts himself across her
way, so as to stop her short.) Farm. No offence, madam, I hope; but I have a good snug farm house, not
far off hand; and if so be you'd be so good to take a night's lodging,
you and the young lady with you, you'd have a hearty welcome. That's all
I can say and you'd make my wife very happy; for she's a good woman, to
say nothing of myself. Landlord. If I may be so bold to put in my word, madam, you'd have as
good beds, and be as well lodged, with Farmer Hearty, as in e'er a house
at Salt Hill. Mrs. Talb. I am very much obliged--

Farm. O, say nothing o' that, madam. I am sure I shall be as much
obliged if you do come. Do, miss, speak for me. Louisa. Pray, dear mother--

Farm. She will. (Calls behind the scenes.) Here, waiter! hostler! driver! what's your name? drive the chaise up here to the door, smart,
close. Lean on my arm, madam, and we'll have you in and home in a whiff. (Exeunt Mrs. Talbot, Louisa, Farmer, Landlord and Waiter.) Landlady (sola). What a noise and a rout this farmer man makes! and my
husband, with his great broad face, bowing, as great a nincompoop as
t'other. The folks are all bewitched with the old woman, I verily
believe. (Aloud.) A good morning to you, ladies. END OF THE FIRST ACT. ACT THE SECOND. SCENE I. A field near Eton College;--several boys crossing backwards and forwards
in the back-ground. In front, TALBOT, WHEELER, LORD JOHN and BURSAL. Talbot. Fair play, Wheeler! Have at 'em, my boy! There they stand,
fair game! There's Bursal there, with his dead forty-five votes at
command; and Lord John with his--how many live friends? Lord John (coolly). Sir, I have fifty-six friends, I believe. Talb. Fifty-six friends, his lordship believes--Wheeler inclusive, no
doubt. Lord J. That's as hereafter may be. Wheeler. Hereafter! Oh, fie, my LUD! You know your own Wheeler has,
from the first minute he ever saw you, been your fast friend. Talb. Your fast friend from the first minute he ever saw you, my lord! That's well hit, Wheeler; stick to that; stick fast. Fifty-six friends,
Wheeler INclusive, hey, my lord! hey, my LUD! Lord J.  Talbot EXclusive, I find, contrary to my expectations. Talb. Ay, contrary to your expectations, you find that Talbot is not a
dog that will lick the dust:  but then there's enough of the true spaniel
breed to be had for whistling for; hey, Wheeler? Bursal (aside to Wheeler). A pretty electioneerer. So much the better
for you, Wheeler. Why, unless he bought a vote, he'd never win one, if
he talked from this to the day of judgment. Wheeler (aside to Bursal). And as he has no money to buy votes--he! he! he!--we are safe enough. Talb. That's well done, Wheeler; fight the by-battle there with Bursal. Now you are sure of the main with Lord John. Lord J. Sure! I never made Mr. Wheeler any promise yet. Wheel. O; I ask no promise from his lordship; we are upon honour:  I
trust entirely to his lordship's good nature and generosity, and to his
regard for his own family; I having the honour, though distantly, to be
related. Lord J. Related! How, Wheeler? Wheel. Connected, I mean, which is next door, as I may say, to being
related. Related slipped out by mistake; I beg pardon, my Lord John. Lord J. Related!--a strange mistake, Wheeler. Talb. Overshot yourself, Wheeler; overshot yourself, by all that's
awkward. And yet, till now, I always took you for "a dead-shot at a
yellow-hammer. "*

*Young noblemen at Oxford wear yellow tufts at the tops of their caps. Hence their flatterers are said to be dead-shots at yellow-hammers. Wheel. (taking Bursal by the arm). Bursal, a word with you. (Aside to
Bursal.) What a lump of family pride that Lord John is. Talb. Keep out of my hearing, Wheeler, lest I should spoil sport. But
never fear:  you'll please Bursal sooner than I shall. I can't, for the
soul of me, bring myself to say that Bursal's not purse-proud, and you
can. Give you joy. Burs. A choice electioneerer!--ha! ha! ha! Wheel. (faintly). He! he! he!--a choice electioneerer, as you say. (Exeunt Wheeler and Bursal; manent Lord J. and Talbot.) Lord J. There was a time, Talbot--

Talb. There was a time, my lord--to save trouble and a long explanation-
-there was a time when you liked Talbots better than spaniels; you
understand me? Lord J.  I have found it very difficult to understand you of late, Mr.
Talbot. Talb. Yes, because you have used other people's understandings instead
of your own. Be yourself, my lord. See with your own eyes, and hear
with your own ears, and then you'll find me still, what I've been these
seven years; not your understrapper, your hanger-on, your flatterer, but
your friend! If you choose to have me for a friend, here's my hand. I
am your friend, and you'll not find a better. Lord J. (giving his hand). You are a strange fellow, Talbot; I thought I
never could have forgiven you for what you said last night. Talb. What? for I don't keep a register of my sayings. Oh, it was
something about gaming--Wheeler was flattering your taste for it, and he
put me into a passion--I forget what I said. But, whatever it was, I'm
sure it was well meant, and I believe it was well said. Lord J. But you laugh at me sometimes to my face. Talb. Would you rather I should laugh at you behind your back? Lord. J. But of all things in the world I hate to be laughed at. Listen
to me, and don't fumble in your pockets while I'm talking to you. Talb. I'm fumbling for--oh, here it is. Now, Lord John, I once did
laugh at you behind your back, and what's droll enough, it was at your
back I laughed. Here's a caricature I drew of you--I really am sorry I
did it; but 'tis best to show it to you myself. Lord J. (aside). It is all I can do to forgive this. (After a pause, he
tears the paper.) I have heard of this caricature before; but I did not
expect, Talbot, that you would come and show it to me, yourself, Talbot,
so handsomely, especially at such a time as this. Wheeler might well say
you are a bad electioneerer. Talb. Oh, hang it! I forgot my election, and your fifty-six friends. Enter RORY O'RYAN. Rory (claps Talbot on the back). Fifty-six friends, have you, Talbot? Say seven--fifty-seven, I mean; for I'll lay you a wager, you've forget
me; and that's a shame for you, too; for out of the whole posse-comitatus
entirely now, you have not a stauncher friend than Poor little Rory
O'Ryan. And a good right he has to befriend you; for you stood by him
when many who ought to have known better were hunting him down for a wild
Irishman. Now that same wild Irishman has as much gratitude in him as
any tame Englishman of them all. But don't let's be talking sintimint;
for, for my share I'd not give a bogberry a bushel for sintimint, when I
could get anything better. Lord J. And pray, sir, what may a bogberry be? Rory. Phoo! don't be playing the innocent, now. Where have you lived
all your life (I ask pardon, my LARD) not to know a bogberry when you see
or hear of it? (Turns to Talbot.) But what are ye standing idling here
for? Sure, there's Wheeler, and Bursal along with him, canvassing out
yonder at a terrible fine rate. And haven't I been huzzaing for you
there till I'm hoarse? So I am, and just stepped away to suck an orange
for my voice--(sucks an orange.) I am a THOROUGH GOING friend, at
anyrate. Talb. Now, Rory, you are the best fellow in the world, and a THOROUGH
GOING friend; but have a care, or you'll get yourself and me into some
scrape, before you have done with this violent THOROUGH GOING work. Rory. Never fear! never fear, man!--a warm frind and a bitter enemy,
that's my maxim. Talb. Yes, but too warm a friend is as bad as a bitter enemy. Rory. Oh, never fear me! I'm as cool as a cucumber all the time; and
whilst they tink I'm tinking of nothing in life but making a noise, I
make my own snug little remarks in prose and verse, as--now my voice is
after coming back to me, you shall hear, if you plase. Talb. I do please. Rory. I call it Rory's song. Now, mind, I have a verse for everybody--
o' the leading lads, I mean; and I shall put 'em in or lave 'em out,
according to their inclinations and deserts, wise-a-wee to you, my little
frind. So you comprehend it will be Rory's song, with variations. Talbot and Lord John. Let's have it; let's have it without further
preface. Rory sings. "I'm true game to the last, and no WHEELER for me." Rory. There's a stroke, in the first place, for Wheeler,--you take it? Talb. O yes, yes, we take it; go on. Rory sings. "I'm true game to the last, and no Wheeler for me. Of all birds, beasts, or fishes, that swim in the sea,
      Webb'd or finn'd, black or white, man or child, Whig or Tory,
      None but Talbot, O, Talbot's the dog for Rory." Talb. "Talbot the dog" is much obliged to you. Lord J. But if I have any ear, one of your lines is a foot too long, Mr.
O'Ryan. Rory. Phoo, put the best foot foremost for a frind. Slur it in the
singing, and don't be quarrelling, anyhow, for a foot more or less. The
more feet the better it will stand, you know. Only let me go on, and
you'll come to something that will plase you. Rory sings. "Then there's he with the purse that's as long as my arm." Rory. That's Bursal, mind now, whom I mean to allude to in this verse. Lord J. If the allusion's good, we shall probably find out your meaning. Talb. On with you, Rory, and don't read us notes on a song. Lord J. Go on, and let us hear what you say of Bursal. Rory sings. "Then there's he with the purse that's as long as my arm;
      His father's a tanner,--but then where's the harm? Heir to houses, and hunters, and horseponds in fee,
      Won't his skins sure soon buy him a pedigree?" Lord J.  Encore! encore! Why, Rory, I did not think you could make so
good a song. Rory. Sure 'twas none of I made it--'twas Talbot here. Talb. I! Rory. (aside). Not a word:  I'll make you a present of it:  sure, then,
it's your own. Talb. I never wrote a word of it. Rory. (to Lord J.). Phoo, Phoo! he's only denying it out of false
modesty. Lord. J. Well, no matter who wrote it,--sing it again. Rory. Be easy; so I will, and as many more verses as you will to the
back of it. (Winking at Talbot aside.) You shall have the credit of
all. (Aloud.) Put me in when I'm out, Talbot, and you (to Lord John)
join--join. Rory sings, and Lord John sings with him. "Then there's he with the purse that's as long as my arm;
      His father's a tanner,--but then where's the harm? Heir to houses, and hunters, and horseponds in fee,
      Won't his skins sure soon buy him a pedigree? There's my lord with the back that never was bent--"

(Lord John stops singing; Talbot makes signs to Rory to stop; but Rory
does not see him, and sings on.) "There's my lord with the back that never was bent;
      Let him live with his ancestors, I am content." (Rory pushes Lord J. and Talbot with his elbows.) Rory. Join, join, both of ye--why don't you join? (Sings.) "Who'll buy my Lord John? the arch fishwoman cried,
      A nice oyster shut up in a choice shell of pride." Rory. But join or ye spoil all. Talb. You have spoiled all, indeed. Lord J. (making a formal low bow). Mr. Talbot, Lord John thanks you. Rory. Lord John! blood and thunder! I forgot you were by--quite and
clean. Lord J. (puts him aside and continues speaking to Talbot). Lord John
thanks you, Mr. Talbot:  this is the second part of the caricature. Lord
John thanks you for these proofs of friendship--Lord John has reason to
thank you, Mr. Talbot. Rory. No reason in life now. Don't be thanking so much for nothing in
life; or if you must be thanking of somebody, it's me you ought to thank. Lord J.  I ought and do, sir, for unmasking one who--

Talb. (warmly). Unmasking, my lord--

Rory (holding them asunder). Phoo! phoo! phoo! be easy, can't ye?--
there's no unmasking at all in the case. My Lord John, Talbot's writing
the song was all a mistake. Lord J. As much a mistake as your singing it, sir, I presume--

Rory. Just as much. 'Twas all a mistake. So now don't you go and make
a mistake into a misunderstanding. It was I made every word of the song
out o' the face*--that about the back that never was bent, and the
ancestors of the oyster, and all. He did not waste a word of it; upon my
conscience, I wrote it all--though I'll engage you didn't think I could
write a good thing. (Lord John turns away.) I'm telling you the truth,
and not a word of a lie, and yet you won't believe me. *From beginning to end. Lord J. You will excuse me, sir, if I cannot believe two contradictory
assertions within two minutes. Mr. Talbot, I thank you (going). (Rory tries to stop Lord John from going, but cannot.--Exit Lord John.) Rory. Well, if he WILL go, let him go then, and much good may it do him. Nay, but don't you go too. Talb. O Rory, what have you done?--(Talbot runs after Lord J.) Hear me,
my lord. (Exit Talbot.) Rory. Hear him! hear him! hear him!--Well, I'm point blank mad with
myself for making this blunder; but how could I help it? As sure as ever
I am meaning to do the best thing on earth, it turns out the worst. Enter a party of lads, huzzaing. Rory (joins.) Huzza! huzza!--Who, pray, are ye huzzaing for? 1st Boy. Wheeler! Wheeler for ever! huzza! Rory. Talbot! Talbot for ever! huzza! Captain Talbot for ever! huzza! 2nd Boy. CAPTAIN he'll never be,--at least not to-morrow; for Lord John
has just declared for Wheeler. lst Boy. And that turns the scale. Rory. Oh, the scale may turn back again. 3rd Boy. Impossible! Lord John has just given his promise to Wheeler. I heard him with my own ears. (Several speak at once.) And I heard him; and I! and I! and I!--Huzza! Wheeler for ever! Rory. Oh, murder! murder! murder! (Aside.) This goes to my heart! it's
all my doing. O, my poor Talbot!-- murder! murder! murder! But I won't
let them see me cast down, and it is good to be huzzaing at all events. Huzza for Talbot! Talbot for ever! huzza! (Exit.) Enter WHEELER and BURSAL. Wheel. Who was that huzzaing for Talbot? (Rory behind the scenes, "Huzza for Talbot! Talbot for ever! huzza!") Burs. Pooh, it is only Rory O'Ryan, or the roaring lion as I call him. Ha! ha! ha! Rory O'Ryan, alias O'Ryan, the roaring lion; that's a good
one; put it about--Rory O'Ryan, the roaring lion, ha! ha! ha! but you
don't take it--you don't laugh, Wheeler. Wheeler. Ha! ha! ha! O, upon my honour I do laugh; ha! ha! ha! (Aside). It is the hardest work to laugh at his wit. (Aloud.) Rory
O'Ryan, the roaring lion--ha! ha! ha! You know I always laugh, Bursal,
at your jokes--he! he! he!--ready to kill myself. Burs. (sullenly). You are easily killed, then, if that much laughing
will do the business. Wheel. (coughing). Just then--something stuck in my throat; I beg your
pardon. Burs. (still sullen). Oh, you need not beg my pardon about the matter. I don't care whether you laugh or no--not I. Now you have got Lord John
to declare for you, you are above laughing at my jokes, I suppose. Wheel. No, upon my word and honour, I DID laugh. Burs. (aside). A fig for your word and honour. (Aloud.) I know I'm of
no consequence now;  but you'll remember, that if his lordship has the
honour of making you captain, he must have the honour to pay for your
captain's accoutrements; for I sha'n't pay the piper, I promise you,
since I'm of no consequence. Wheel. Of no consequence! But, my dear Bursal, what could put that into
your head? that's the strangest, oddest fancy. Of no consequence! Bursal, of no consequence! Why, everybody that knows anything--everybody
that has seen Bursal House--knows that you are of the greatest
consequence, my dear Bursal. Burs. (taking out his watch, and opening it, looks at it). No, I'm of no
consequence. I wonder that rascal Finsbury is not come yet with the
dresses (still looking at his watch). Wheel. (aside). If Bursal takes it into his head not to lend me the
money to pay for my captain's dress, what will become of me? for I have
not a shilling--and Lord John won't pay for me--and Finsbury has orders
not to leave the house till he is paid by everybody. What will become of
me?--(bites his nails). Burs. (aside). How I love to make him bite his nails! (Aloud.) I know
I'm of no consequence. (Strikes his repeater.) Wheel. What a fine repeater that is of yours, Bursal! It is the best I
ever heard. Burs. So it well may be; for it cost a mint of money. Wheel. No matter to you what anything costs. Happy dog as you are! You
roll in money; and yet you talk of being of no consequence. Burs. But I am not of half so much consequence as Lord John--am I? Wheel. Are you? Why, aren't you twice as rich as he! Burs. Very true, but I'm not purse-proud. Wheel. You purse-proud! I should never have thought of such a thing. Burs. Nor I, if Talbot had not used the word. Wheel. But Talbot thinks everybody purse-proud that has a purse. Burs. (aside). Well, this Wheeler does put one into a good humour with
one's self in spite of one's teeth. (Aloud.) Talbot says blunt things;
but I don't think he's what you can call clever--hey, Wheeler? Wheel. Clever? Oh, not he. Burs. I think I could walk round him. Wheel. To be sure you could. Why, do you know, I've quizzed him
famously myself within this quarter of an hour! Burs. Indeed! I wish I had been by. Wheel. So do I, 'faith! It was the best thing. I wanted, you see, to
get him out of my way, that I might have the field clear for
electioneering to-day. So I bowls up to him with a long face--such a
face as this. Mr. Talbot, do you know--I'm sorry to tell you, here's
Jack Smith has just brought the news from Salt Hill. Your mother, in
getting into the carriage, slipped, and has BROKE her leg, and there
she's lying at a farmhouse, two miles off. Is not it true, Jack? said I.
I saw the farmer helping her in with my own eyes, cries Jack. Off goes
Talbot like an arrow. Quizzed him, quizzed him! said I.

Burs. Ha! ha! ha! quizzed him indeed, with all his cleverness; that was
famously done. Wheel. Ha! ha! ha! With all his cleverness he will be all the evening
hunting for the farmhouse and the mother that has broke her leg; so he is
out of our way. Burs. But what need have you to want him out of your way, now Lord John
has come over to your side? You have the thing at a dead beat. Wheel. Not so dead either; for there's a great independent party, you
know; and if YOU don't help me, Bursal, to canvass them, I shall be no
captain. It is you I depend upon after all. Will you come and canvass
them with me? Dear Bursal, pray--all depends upon you. (Pulls him by the arm--Bursal follows.) Burs. Well, if all depends upon me, I'll see what I can do for you. (Aside.) Then I am of some consequence! Money makes a man of some
consequence, I see; at least with some folks. SCENE II. In the back scene a flock of sheep are seen penned. In front, a party of
country lads and lasses, gaily dressed, as in sheep-shearing time, with
ribands and garlands of flowers, etc., are dancing and singing. Enter PATTY, dressed as the Queen of the Festival, with a lamb in her
arms. The dancers break off when she comes in, and direct their
attention towards her. 1st Peasant. Oh, here comes Patty! Here comes the Queen o' the day. What has kept you from us so long, Patty? 2nd Peasant. "Please your Majesty," you should say. Patty. This poor little lamb of mine was what kept me so long. It
strayed away from the rest; and I should have lost him, so I should, for
ever, if it had not been for a good young gentleman. Yonder he is,
talking to Farmer Hearty. That's the young gentleman who pulled my lamb
out of the ditch for me, into which he had fallen--pretty creature! 1st Peasant. Pretty creature--or, your Majesty, whichever you choose to
be called--come and dance with them, and I'll carry your lamb. (Exeunt, singing and dancing.) Enter FARMER HEARTY and TALBOT. Farmer. Why, young gentleman, I'm glad I happened to light upon you
here, and so to hinder you from going farther astray, and set your heart
at ease like. Talb. Thanks, good farmer, you have set my heart at ease, indeed. But
the truth is, they did frighten me confoundedly--more fool I. Farm. No fool at all, to my notion. I should, at your age, ay, or at my
age, just the self-same way have been frightened myself, if so be that
mention had been made to me, that way, of my own mother's having broke
her leg or so. And greater, by a great deal, the shame for them that
frighted you, than for you to be frighted. How young gentlemen, now, can
bring themselves for to tell such lies, is to me, now, a matter of
amazement, like, that I can't noways get over. Talb. Oh, farmer, such lies are very witty, though you and I don't just
now like the wit of them. This is fun, this is quizzing; but you don't
know what we young gentlemen mean by quizzing. Farm. Ay, but I do though, to my cost, ever since last year. Look you,
now, at yon fine field of wheat. Well, it was just as fine, and finer,
last year, till a young Eton jackanapes--

Talb. Take care what you say, farmer; for I am a young Eton jackanapes. Farm. No; but you be not the young Eton jackanapes that I'm a-thinking
on. I tell you it was this time last year, man; he was a-horseback, I
tell ye, mounted upon a fine bay hunter, out a-hunting, like. Talb. I tell you it was this time last year, man, that I was mounted
upon a fine bay hunter, out a-hunting. Farm. Zooks! would you argufy a man out of his wits? You won't go for
to tell me that you are that impertinent little jackanapes! Talb. No! no! I'll not tell you that I am an impertinent little
jackanapes! Farm (wiping his forehead). Well, don't then, for I can't believe it;
and you put me out. Where was I? Talb. Mounted upon a fine bay hunter. Farm. Ay, so he was. "Here, YOU," says he, meaning me--"open this gate
for me." Now, if he had but a-spoke me fair, I would not have gainsaid
him:  but he falls to swearing, so I bid him open the gate for himself. "There's a bull behind you, farmer," says he. I turns. "Quizzed him!" cries my jackanapes, and off he gallops him, through the very thick of my
corn; but he got a fall, leaping the ditch out yonder, which pacified me,
like, at the minute. So I goes up to see whether he was killed; but he
was not a whit the worse for his tumble. So I should ha' fell into a
passion with him then, to be sure, about my corn; but his horse had got
such a terrible sprain, I couldn't say anything to him; for I was a-
pitying the poor animal. As fine a hunter as ever you saw! I am sartain
sure he could never come to good after. Talb. (aside). I do think, from the description, that this was Wheeler;
and I have paid for the horse which he spoiled! (Aloud.) Should you know
either the man or the horse again, if you were to see them? Farm. Ay, that I should, to my dying day. Talb. Will you come with me, then, and you'll do me some guineas' worth
of service? Farm. Ay, that I will, with a deal of pleasure; for you be a civil
spoken young gentleman; and, besides, I don't think the worse on you for
being FRIGHTED a little about your mother; being what I might ha' been,
at your age, myself; for I had a mother myself once. So lead on, master. (Exeunt.) END OF THE SECOND ACT. ACT THE THIRD. SCENE I. The garden of the "Windmill Inn," at Salt Hill. MISS BURSAL, MRS. NEWINGTON, SALLY, the Chambermaid. (Miss Bursal, in a fainting state, is sitting on a garden stool, and
leaning her head against the Landlady. Sally is holding a glass of water
and a smelling bottle.) Miss Bursal. Where am I? Where am I? Landlady. At the "Windmill," at Salt Hill, young lady; and ill or well,
you can't be better. Sally. Do you find yourself better since coming into the air, miss? Miss B. Better! Oh, I shall never be better! (Leans her head on hand, and rocks herself backwards and forwards.) Landlady. My dear young lady, don't take on so. (Aside.) Now would I
give something to know what it was my Lady Piercefield said to the
father, and what the father said to this one, and what's the matter at
the bottom of affairs. Sally, did you hear anything at the doors? Sally (aside). No, indeed, ma'am; I never BE'S at the doors. Landlady (aside). Simpleton! (Aloud.) But, my dear Miss Bursal, if I
may be so bold--if you'd only disembosom your mind of what's on it--

Miss B.  Disembosom my mind! Nonsense! I've nothing on my mind. Pray
leave me, madam. Landlady (aside). Madam, indeed! madam, forsooth! Oh, I'll make her pay
for that! That MADAM shall go down in the bill, as sure as my name's
Newington. (Landlady, in a higher tone.) Well, I wish you better,
ma'am. I suppose I'd best send your own servant? Miss B. (sullenly). Yes, I suppose so. (To Sally.) You need not wait,
child, nor look so curious. Sally. CUR'OUS! Indeed, miss, if I look a little CUR'OUS, or so
(looking at her dress), 'tis only because I was FRIGHTED to see you take
on, which made me forget my clean apron, when I came out; and this apron-
-

Miss B.  Hush! Hush! child. Don't tell me about clean aprons, nor run
on with your vulgar talk. Is there ever a seat one can set on in that
_H_arbour yonder? Sally. O dear 'ART, yes, miss; 'tis the pleasantest _H_arbour on
_H_earth. Be pleased to lean on my _H_arm, and you'll soon be there. Miss B. (going). Then tell my woman she need not come to me, and let
nobody INTERUDE on me--do you 'EAR? (Aside.) Oh, what will become of
me? and the Talbots will soon know it! And the ponies, and the curricle,
and the vis-a-vis--what will become of them? and how shall I make my
appearance at the Montem, or any WARE else? SCENE II. LORD JOHN--WHEELER--BURSAL. Wheeler. Well, but my lord--Well, but Bursal--though my Lady
Piercefield--though Miss Bursal is come to Salt Hill, you won't leave us
all at sixes and sevens. What can we do without you? Lord J. You can do very well without me. Bursal. You can do very well without me. Wheel. (to Burs.). Impossible!--impossible! You know Mr. Finsbury will
be here just now, with the dresses; and we have to try them on. Burs. And to pay for them. Wheel. And to settle about the procession. And then, my lord, the
election is to come on this evening. You won't go till that's over, as
your lordship has PROMISED me your lordship's vote and interest. Lord J. My vote I promised you, Mr. Wheeler; but I said not a syllable
about my INTEREST. My friends, perhaps, have not been offended, though I
have, by Mr. Talbot. I shall leave them to their own inclinations. Burs. (whistling). Wheugh! wheugh! wheugh! Wheeler, the principal's
nothing without the interest. Wheel. Oh, the interest will go along with the principal, of course; for
I'm persuaded, if my lord leaves his friends to their inclinations, it
will be the inclination of my lord's friends to vote as he does, if he
says nothing to them to the contrary. Lord J.  I told you, Mr. Wheeler, that I should leave them to themselves. Burs. (still whistling). Well, I'll do my best to make that father of
mine send me off to Oxford. I'm sure I'm fit to go--along with Wheeler. Why, you'd best be my tutor, Wheeler!--a devilish good thought. Wheel. An excellent thought. Burs. And a cursed fine dust we should kick up at Oxford, with your
Montem money and all!--Money's THE GO after all. I wish it was come to
my making you my last bow, "ye distant spires, ye ANTIC towers!" Wheel. (aside to Lord J.). Ye ANTIC towers!--fit for Oxford, my lord! Lord J. Antique towers, I suppose Mr. Bursal means. Burs. Antique, to be sure!--I said antique, did not I, Wheeler? Wheel. O, yes. Lord J. (aside). What a mean animal is this! Enter RORY O'RYAN. Rory. Why, now, what's become of Talbot, I want to know? There he is
not to be found anywhere in the wide world; and there's a hullabaloo
amongst his friends for him. (Wheeler and Bursal wink at one another.) Wheel. We know nothing of him. Lord J.  I have not the honour, sir, to be one of Mr. Talbot's friends. It is his own fault, and I am sorry for it. Rory. 'Faith, so am I, especially as it is mine--fault I mean; and
especially as the election is just going to come on. Enter a party of boys, who cry, Finsbury's come!--Finsbury's come with
the dresses! Wheel. Finsbury's come? Oh, let us see the dresses, and let us try 'em
on to-night. Burs. (pushing the crowd). On with ye--on with ye, there!--Let's try 'em
on!--Try 'em on--I'm to be colonel. lst Boy. And I lieutenant. 2nd Boy. And I ensign. 3rd Boy. And I college salt-bearer. 4th Boy. And I oppidan. 5th Boy. Oh, what a pity I'm in mourning. Several speak at once. And we are servitors. We are to be the eight servitors. Wheel. And I am to be your Captain, I hope. Come on, my Colonel. (To
Bursal). My lord, you are coming? Rory. By-and-by--I've a word in his ear, by your LAVE and his. Burs. Why, what the devil stops the way, there?--Push on--on with them. 6th Boy. I'm marshal. Burs. On with you--on with you--who cares what you are? Wheel. (to Bursal, aside). You'll pay Finsbury for me, you rich Jew? (To Lord John.) Your lordship will remember your lordship's promise. Lord J.  I do not usually forget my promises, sir; and therefore need not
to be reminded of them. Wheel. I beg pardon--I beg ten thousand pardons, my lord. Burs. (taking him by the arm). Come on, man, and don't stand begging
pardon there, or I'll leave you. Wheel. (to Burs.) I beg pardon, Bursal--I beg pardon, ten thousand times.