There
was the fat trout, and there also was Little Joe's smallest cousin,
Shadow the Weasel, who is a great thief and altogether bad. Little Joe
sprang at him angrily, but Shadow was too quick and darted away. Little
Joe put the fish back on the log and waited. This time he didn't take
his eyes off it. At last, when he was almost ready to give up, he saw
Buster Bear shuffling along towards the Laughing Brook. Suddenly Buster
stopped and sniffed. One of the Merry Little Breezes had carried the
scent of that fat trout over to him. Then he came straight over to where
the fish lay, his nose wrinkling, and his eyes twinkling with pleasure. "Now I wonder who was so thoughtful as to leave this fine breakfast
ready for me," said he out loud. "Me," said Little Joe in a rather faint voice. "I caught it especially
for you." "Thank you," replied Buster, and his eyes twinkled more than ever. "I
think we are going to be friends." "I--I hope so," replied Little Joe. VII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY HAS NO LUCK AT ALL


Farmer Brown's boy tramped through the Green Forest, whistling merrily. He always whistles when he feels light-hearted, and he always feels
light-hearted when he goes fishing. You see, he is just as fond of
fishing as is Little Joe Otter or Billy Mink or Buster Bear. And now he
was making his way through the Green Forest to the Laughing Brook, sure
that by the time he had followed it down to the Smiling Pool he would
have a fine lot of trout to take home. He knew every pool in the
Laughing Brook where the trout love to hide, did Farmer Brown's boy,
and it was just the kind of a morning when the trout should be hungry. So he whistled as he tramped along, and his whistle was good to hear. When he reached the first little pool he baited his hook very carefully
and then, taking the greatest care to keep out of sight of any trout
that might be in the little pool, he began to fish. Now Farmer Brown's
boy learned a long time ago that to be a successful fisherman one must
have a great deal of patience, so though he didn't get a bite right away
as he had expected to, he wasn't the least bit discouraged. He kept very
quiet and fished and fished, patiently waiting for a foolish trout to
take his hook. But he didn't get so much as a nibble. "Either the trout
have lost their appetite or they have grown very wise," muttered Farmer
Brown's boy, as after a long time he moved on to the next little pool. There the same thing happened. He was very patient, very, very patient,
but his patience brought no reward, not so much as the faintest kind of
a nibble. Farmer Brown's boy trudged on to the next pool, and there was
a puzzled frown on his freckled face. Such a thing never had happened
before. He didn't know what to make of it. All the night before he had
dreamed about the delicious dinner of fried trout he would have the next
day, and now--well, if he didn't catch some trout pretty soon, that
splendid dinner would never be anything but a dream. "If I didn't know that nobody else comes fishing here, I should think
that somebody had been here this very morning and caught all the fish or
else frightened them so that they are all in hiding," said he, as he
trudged on to the next little pool. "I never had such bad luck in all my
life before. Hello! What's this?" There, on the bank beside the little pool, were the heads of three
trout. Farmer Brown's boy scowled down at them more puzzled than ever. "Somebody _has_ been fishing here, and they have had better luck than I
have," thought he. He looked up the Laughing Brook and down the Laughing
Brook and this way and that way, but no one was to be seen. Then he
picked up one of the little heads and looked at it sharply. "It wasn't
cut off with a knife; it was bitten off!" he exclaimed. "I wonder now if
Billy Mink is the scamp who has spoiled my fun." Thereafter he kept a sharp lookout for signs of Billy Mink, but though
he found two or three more trout heads, he saw no other signs and he
caught no fish. This puzzled him more than ever. It didn't seem possible
that such a little fellow as Billy Mink could have caught or frightened
all the fish or have eaten so many. Besides, he didn't remember ever
having known Billy to leave heads around that way. Billy sometimes
catches more fish than he can eat, but then he usually hides them. The
farther he went down the Laughing Brook, the more puzzled Farmer Brown's
boy grew. It made him feel very queer. He would have felt still more
queer if he had known that all the time two other fishermen who had been
before him were watching him and chuckling to themselves. They were
Little Joe Otter and Buster Bear. VIII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY FEELS HIS HAIR RISE


  'Twas just a sudden odd surprise
  Made Farmer Brown's boy's hair to rise. That's a funny thing for hair to do--rise up all of a sudden--isn't it? But that is just what the hair on Farmer Brown's boy's head did the day
he went fishing in the Laughing Brook and had no luck at all. There are
just two things that make hair rise--anger and fear. Anger sometimes
makes the hair on the back and neck of Bowser the Hound and of some
other little people bristle and stand up, and you know the hair on the
tail of Black Pussy stands on end until her tail looks twice as big as
it really is. Both anger and fear make it do that. But there is only one
thing that can make the hair on the head of Farmer Brown's boy rise, and
as it isn't anger, of course it must be fear. It never had happened before. You see, there isn't much of anything that
Farmer Brown's boy is really afraid of. Perhaps he wouldn't have been
afraid this time if it hadn't been for the surprise of what he found. You see when he had found the heads of those trout on the bank he knew
right away that some one else had been fishing, and that was why he
couldn't catch any; but it didn't seem possible that little Billy Mink
could have eaten all those trout, and Farmer Brown's boy didn't once
think of Little Joe Otter, and so he was very, very much puzzled. He was turning it all over in his mind and studying what it could mean,
when he came to a little muddy place on the bank of the Laughing Brook,
and there he saw something that made his eyes look as if they would pop
right out of his head, and it was right then that he felt his hair rise. Anyway, that is what he said when he told about it afterward. What was
it he saw? What do you think? Why, it was a footprint in the soft mud. Yes, Sir, that's what it was, and all it was. But it was the biggest
footprint Farmer Brown's boy ever had seen, and it looked as if it had
been made only a few minutes before. It was the footprint of Buster
Bear. Now Farmer Brown's boy didn't know that Buster Bear had come down to the
Green Forest to live. He never had heard of a Bear being in the Green
Forest. And so he was so surprised that he had hard work to believe his
own eyes, and he had a queer feeling all over,--a little chilly feeling,
although it was a warm day. Somehow, he didn't feel like meeting Buster
Bear. If he had had his terrible gun with him, it might have been
different. But he didn't, and so he suddenly made up his mind that he
didn't want to fish any more that day. He had a funny feeling, too, that
he was being watched, although he couldn't see any one. He _was_ being
watched. Little Joe Otter and Buster Bear were watching him and taking
the greatest care to keep out of his sight. All the way home through the Green Forest, Farmer Brown's boy kept
looking behind him, and he didn't draw a long breath until he reached
the edge of the Green Forest. He hadn't run, but he had wanted to. "Huh!" said Buster Bear to Little Joe Otter, "I believe he was afraid!" And Buster Bear was just exactly right. IX

LITTLE JOE OTTER HAS GREAT NEWS TO TELL


Little Joe Otter was fairly bursting with excitement. He could hardly
contain himself. He felt that he had the greatest news to tell since
Peter Rabbit had first found the tracks of Buster Bear in the Green
Forest. He couldn't keep it to himself a minute longer than he had to. So he hurried to the Smiling Pool, where he was sure he would find Billy
Mink and Jerry Muskrat and Grandfather Frog and Spotty the Turtle, and
he hoped that perhaps some of the little people who live in the Green
Forest might be there too. Sure enough, Peter Rabbit was there on one
side of the Smiling Pool, making faces at Reddy Fox, who was on the
other side, which, of course, was not at all nice of Peter. Mr. and Mrs.
Redwing were there, and Blacky the Crow was sitting in the Big
Hickory-tree. Little Joe Otter swam straight to the Big Rock and climbed up to the
very highest part. He looked so excited, and his eyes sparkled so, that
every one knew right away that something had happened. "Hi!" cried Billy Mink. "Look at Little Joe Otter! It must be that for
once he has been smarter than Buster Bear." Little Joe made a good-natured face at Billy Mink and shook his head. "No, Billy," said he, "you are wrong, altogether wrong.