What trash is Rome? What Rubbish, and what Offall? when it serues
For the base matter, to illuminate
So vile a thing as Caesar. But oh Griefe,
Where hast thou led me? I (perhaps) speake this
Before a willing Bond-man: then I know
My answere must be made. But I am arm'd,
And dangers are to me indifferent

   Cask. You speake to Caska, and to such a man,
That is no flearing Tell-tale. Hold, my Hand:
Be factious for redresse of all these Griefes,
And I will set this foot of mine as farre,
As who goes farthest

   Cassi. There's a Bargaine made. Now know you, Caska, I haue mou'd already
Some certaine of the Noblest minded Romans
To vnder-goe, with me, an Enterprize,
Of Honorable dangerous consequence;
And I doe know by this, they stay for me
In Pompeyes Porch: for now this fearefull Night,
There is no stirre, or walking in the streetes;
And the Complexion of the Element
Is Fauors, like the Worke we haue in hand,
Most bloodie, fierie, and most terrible. Enter Cinna. Caska. Stand close a while, for heere comes one in
haste

   Cassi. 'Tis Cinna, I doe know him by his Gate,
He is a friend. Cinna, where haste you so? Cinna. To finde out you: Who's that, Metellus
Cymber? Cassi. No, it is Caska, one incorporate
To our Attempts. Am I not stay'd for, Cinna? Cinna. I am glad on't. What a fearefull Night is this? There's two or three of vs haue seene strange sights

   Cassi. Am I not stay'd for? tell me

   Cinna. Yes, you are. O Cassius,
If you could but winne the Noble Brutus
To our party-
  Cassi. Be you content. Good Cinna, take this Paper,
And looke you lay it in the Pretors Chayre,
Where Brutus may but finde it: and throw this
In at his Window; set this vp with Waxe
Vpon old Brutus Statue: all this done,
Repaire to Pompeyes Porch, where you shall finde vs.
Is Decius Brutus and Trebonius there? Cinna. All, but Metellus Cymber, and hee's gone
To seeke you at your house. Well, I will hie,
And so bestow these Papers as you bad me

   Cassi. That done, repayre to Pompeyes Theater. Exit Cinna. Come Caska, you and I will yet, ere day,
See Brutus at his house: three parts of him
Is ours alreadie, and the man entire
Vpon the next encounter, yeelds him ours

   Cask. O, he sits high in all the Peoples hearts:
And that which would appeare Offence in vs,
His Countenance, like richest Alchymie,
Will change to Vertue, and to Worthinesse

   Cassi. Him, and his worth, and our great need of him,
You haue right well conceited: let vs goe,
For it is after Mid-night, and ere day,
We will awake him, and be sure of him. Exeunt. Actus Secundus. Enter Brutus in his Orchard. Brut. What Lucius, hoe? I cannot, by the progresse of the Starres,
Giue guesse how neere to day- Lucius, I say? I would it were my fault to sleepe so soundly. When Lucius, when? awake, I say: what Lucius? Enter Lucius. Luc. Call'd you, my Lord? Brut. Get me a Tapor in my Study, Lucius:
When it is lighted, come and call me here

   Luc. I will, my Lord. Enter. Brut. It must be by his death: and for my part,
I know no personall cause, to spurne at him,
But for the generall. He would be crown'd:
How that might change his nature, there's the question? It is the bright day, that brings forth the Adder,
And that craues warie walking: Crowne him that,
And then I graunt we put a Sting in him,
That at his will he may doe danger with. Th' abuse of Greatnesse, is, when it dis-ioynes
Remorse from Power: And to speake truth of Caesar,
I haue not knowne, when his Affections sway'd
More then his Reason. But 'tis a common proofe,
That Lowlynesse is young Ambitions Ladder,
Whereto the Climber vpward turnes his Face:
But when he once attaines the vpmost Round,
He then vnto the Ladder turnes his Backe,
Lookes in the Clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend: so Caesar may;
Then least he may, preuent. And since the Quarrell
Will beare no colour, for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus; that what he is, augmented,
Would runne to these, and these extremities:
And therefore thinke him as a Serpents egge,
Which hatch'd, would as his kinde grow mischieuous;
And kill him in the shell. Enter Lucius. Luc. The Taper burneth in your Closet, Sir:
Searching the Window for a Flint, I found
This Paper, thus seal'd vp, and I am sure
It did not lye there when I went to Bed. Giues him the Letter. Brut. Get you to Bed againe, it is not day:
Is not to morrow (Boy) the first of March? Luc. I know not, Sir

   Brut. Looke in the Calender, and bring me word

   Luc. I will, Sir. Enter. Brut. The exhalations, whizzing in the ayre,
Giue so much light, that I may reade by them. Opens the Letter, and reades. Brutus thou sleep'st; awake, and see thy selfe:
Shall Rome, &c. speake, strike, redresse. Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake. Such instigations haue beene often dropt,
Where I haue tooke them vp:
Shall Rome, &c. Thus must I piece it out:
Shall Rome stand vnder one mans awe? What Rome? My Ancestors did from the streetes of Rome
The Tarquin driue, when he was call'd a King. Speake, strike, redresse. Am I entreated
To speake, and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redresse will follow, thou receiuest
Thy full Petition at the hand of Brutus. Enter Lucius. Luc. Sir, March is wasted fifteene dayes. Knocke within. Brut. 'Tis good. Go to the Gate, some body knocks:
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
I haue not slept. Betweene the acting of a dreadfull thing,
And the first motion, all the Interim is
Like a Phantasma, or a hideous Dreame:
The Genius, and the mortall Instruments
Are then in councell; and the state of a man,
Like to a little Kingdome, suffers then
The nature of an Insurrection. Enter Lucius. Luc. Sir, 'tis your Brother Cassius at the Doore,
Who doth desire to see you

   Brut. Is he alone? Luc. No, Sir, there are moe with him

   Brut. Doe you know them? Luc. No, Sir, their Hats are pluckt about their Eares,
And halfe their Faces buried in their Cloakes,
That by no meanes I may discouer them,
By any marke of fauour

   Brut.