16:3 And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will shew thee what thou
shalt do: and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee. 16:4 And Samuel did that which the LORD spake, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the town trembled at his coming, and said, Comest
thou peaceably? 16:5 And he said, Peaceably: I am come to sacrifice
unto the LORD: sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the
sacrifice. 16:6 And it came to pass, when they were come, that he looked on
Eliab, and said, Surely the LORD's anointed is before him. 16:7 But the LORD said unto Samuel, Look not on his countenance, or on
the height of his stature; because I have refused him: for the LORD
seeth not as man seeth; for man looketh on the outward appearance, but
the LORD looketh on the heart. 16:8 Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And
he said, Neither hath the LORD chosen this. 16:9 Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither hath the
LORD chosen this. 16:10 Again, Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And
Samuel said unto Jesse, The LORD hath not chosen these. 16:11 And Samuel said unto Jesse, Are here all thy children? And he
said, There remaineth yet the youngest, and, behold, he keepeth the
sheep. And Samuel said unto Jesse, Send and fetch him: for we will not
sit down till he come hither. 16:12 And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and withal of
a beautiful countenance, and goodly to look to. And the LORD said,
Arise, anoint him: for this is he. 16:13 Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst
of his brethren: and the Spirit of the LORD came upon David from that
day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah. 16:14 But the Spirit of the LORD departed from Saul, and an evil
spirit from the LORD troubled him. 16:15 And Saul's servants said unto him, Behold now, an evil spirit
from God troubleth thee. 16:16 Let our lord now command thy servants, which are before thee, to
seek out a man, who is a cunning player on an harp: and it shall come
to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall
play with his hand, and thou shalt be well. 16:17 And Saul said unto his servants, Provide me now a man that can
play well, and bring him to me. 16:18 Then answered one of the servants, and said, Behold, I have seen
a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite, that is cunning in playing, and a
mighty valiant man, and a man of war, and prudent in matters, and a
comely person, and the LORD is with him. 16:19 Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Jesse, and said, Send me
David thy son, which is with the sheep. 16:20 And Jesse took an ass laden with bread, and a bottle of wine,
and a kid, and sent them by David his son unto Saul. 16:21 And David came to Saul, and stood before him: and he loved him
greatly; and he became his armourbearer. 16:22 And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand
before me; for he hath found favour in my sight. 16:23 And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon
Saul, that David took an harp, and played with his hand: so Saul was
refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him. 17:1 Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle, and
were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah, and
pitched between Shochoh and Azekah, in Ephesdammim. 17:2 And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and
pitched by the valley of Elah, and set the battle in array against the
Philistines. 17:3 And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and
Israel stood on a mountain on the other side: and there was a valley
between them. 17:4 And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines,
named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span. 17:5 And he had an helmet of brass upon his head, and he was armed
with a coat of mail; and the weight of the coat was five thousand
shekels of brass. 17:6 And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a target of brass
between his shoulders. 17:7 And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam; and his
spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron: and one bearing a
shield went before him. 17:8 And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel, and said unto
them, Why are ye come out to set your battle in array? am not I a
Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? choose you a man for you, and let
him come down to me. 17:9 If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be
your servants: but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall
ye be our servants, and serve us. 17:10 And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day;
give me a man, that we may fight together. 17:11 When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine,
they were dismayed, and greatly afraid. 17:12 Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah,
whose name was Jesse; and he had eight sons: and the man went among
men for an old man in the days of Saul. 17:13 And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the
battle: and the names of his three sons that went to the battle were
Eliab the firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third
Shammah. 17:14 And David was the youngest: and the three eldest followed Saul. 17:15 But David went and returned from Saul to feed his father's sheep
at Bethlehem. 17:16 And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented
himself forty days. 17:17 And Jesse said unto David his son, Take now for thy brethren an
ephah of this parched corn, and these ten loaves, and run to the camp
of thy brethren; 17:18 And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of
their thousand, and look how thy brethren fare, and take their pledge. 17:19 Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the
valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines. 17:20 And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with
a keeper, and took, and went, as Jesse had commanded him; and he came
to the trench, as the host was going forth to the fight, and shouted
for the battle. 17:21 For Israel and the Philistines had put the battle in array, army
against army. 17:22 And David left his carriage in the hand of the keeper of the
carriage, and ran into the army, and came and saluted his brethren. 17:23 And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion,
the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the armies of the
Philistines, and spake according to the same words: and David heard
them. 17:24 And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him,
and were sore afraid. 17:25 And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come
up? surely to defy Israel is he come up: and it shall be, that the
man who killeth him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and
will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in
Israel. 17:26 And David spake to the men that stood by him, saying, What shall
be done to the man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the
reproach from Israel? for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that
he should defy the armies of the living God? 17:27 And the people
answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man
that killeth him. 17:28 And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men;
and Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why camest
thou down hither? and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the
wilderness? I know thy pride, and the naughtiness of thine heart; for
thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle. 17:29 And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause? 17:30 And he turned from him toward another, and spake after the same
manner: and the people answered him again after the former manner. 17:31 And when the words were heard which David spake, they rehearsed
them before Saul: and he sent for him. 17:32 And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him;
thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine. 17:33 And Saul said to David, Thou art not able to go against this
Philistine to fight with him: for thou art but a youth, and he a man
of war from his youth. 17:34 And David said unto Saul, Thy servant kept his father's sheep,
and there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock:
17:35 And I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of
his mouth: and when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard,
and smote him, and slew him. 17:36 Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear: and this
uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he hath
defied the armies of the living God. 17:37 David said moreover, The LORD that delivered me out of the paw
of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of
the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said unto David, Go, and the
LORD be with thee. 17:38 And Saul armed David with his armour, and he put an helmet of
brass upon his head; also he armed him with a coat of mail. 17:39 And David girded his sword upon his armour, and he assayed to
go; for he had not proved it. And David said unto Saul, I cannot go
with these; for I have not proved them. And David put them off him. 17:40 And he took his staff in his hand, and chose him five smooth
stones out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he
had, even in a scrip; and his sling was in his hand: and he drew near
to the Philistine. 17:41 And the Philistine came on and drew near unto David; and the man
that bare the shield went before him. 17:42 And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he
disdained him: for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair
countenance. 17:43 And the Philistine said unto David, Am I a dog, that thou comest
to me with staves? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods. 17:44 And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give
thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of the field. 17:45 Then said David to the Philistine, Thou comest to me with a
sword, and with a spear, and with a shield: but I come to thee in the
name of the LORD of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou
hast defied. 17:46 This day will the LORD deliver thee into mine hand; and I will
smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and I will give the
carcases of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the
air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; that all the earth may know
that there is a God in Israel. 17:47 And all this assembly shall know that the LORD saveth not with
sword and spear: for the battle is the LORD's, and he will give you
into our hands. 17:48 And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came, and
drew nigh to meet David, that David hastened, and ran toward the army
to meet the Philistine. 17:49 And David put his hand in his bag, and took thence a stone, and
slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead, that the stone
sunk into his forehead; and he fell upon his face to the earth. 17:50 So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a
stone, and smote the Philistine, and slew him; but there was no sword
in the hand of David. 17:51 Therefore David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his
sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof, and slew him, and cut
off his head therewith. And when the Philistines saw their champion
was dead, they fled. 17:52 And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and
pursued the Philistines, until thou come to the valley, and to the
gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim,
even unto Gath, and unto Ekron. 17:53 And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the
Philistines, and they spoiled their tents. 17:54 And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to
Jerusalem; but he put his armour in his tent. 17:55 And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said
unto Abner, the captain of the host, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner said, As thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell. 17:56 And the king said, Enquire thou whose son the stripling is. 17:57 And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine,
Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the
Philistine in his hand.