"The police are coming up the
hill." VI. THE OTHER PHILOSOPHER

Between high hedges in Hertfordshire, hedges so high as to create
a kind of grove, two men were running. They did not run in a
scampering or feverish manner, but in the steady swing of the
pendulum. Across the great plains and uplands to the right and
left of the lane, a long tide of sunset light rolled like a sea
of ruby, lighting up the long terraces of the hills and picking
out the few windows of the scattered hamlets in startling
blood-red sparks. But the lane was cut deep in the hill and
remained in an abrupt shadow. The two men running in it had an
impression not uncommonly experienced between those wild green
English walls; a sense of being led between the walls of a maze. Though their pace was steady it was vigorous; their faces were
heated and their eyes fixed and bright. There was, indeed,
something a little mad in the contrast between the evening's
stillness over the empty country-side, and these two figures
fleeing wildly from nothing. They had the look of two lunatics,
possibly they were. "Are you all right?" said Turnbull, with civility. "Can you keep
this up?" "Quite easily, thank you," replied MacIan. "I run very well." "Is that a qualification in a family of warriors?" asked
Turnbull. "Undoubtedly. Rapid movement is essential," answered MacIan, who
never saw a joke in his life. Turnbull broke out into a short laugh, and silence fell between
them, the panting silence of runners. Then MacIan said: "We run better than any of those policemen. They are too fat. Why do you make your policemen so fat?" "I didn't do much towards making them fat myself," replied
Turnbull, genially, "but I flatter myself that I am now doing
something towards making them thin. You'll see they will be as
lean as rakes by the time they catch us. They will look like your
friend, Cardinal Manning." "But they won't catch us," said MacIan, in his literal way. "No, we beat them in the great military art of running away,"
returned the other. "They won't catch us unless----"

MacIan turned his long equine face inquiringly. "Unless what?" he
said, for Turnbull had gone silent suddenly, and seemed to be
listening intently as he ran as a horse does with his ears turned
back. "Unless what?" repeated the Highlander. "Unless they do--what they have done. Listen." MacIan slackened
his trot, and turned his head to the trail they had left behind
them. Across two or three billows of the up and down lane came
along the ground the unmistakable throbbing of horses' hoofs. "They have put the mounted police on us," said Turnbull, shortly. "Good Lord, one would think we were a Revolution." "So we are," said MacIan calmly. "What shall we do? Shall we turn
on them with our points?" "It may come to that," answered Turnbull, "though if it does, I
reckon that will be the last act. We must put it off if we can." And he stared and peered about him between the bushes. "If we
could hide somewhere the beasts might go by us," he said. "The
police have their faults, but thank God they're inefficient. Why,
here's the very thing. Be quick and quiet. Follow me." He suddenly swung himself up the high bank on one side of the
lane. It was almost as high and smooth as a wall, and on the top
of it the black hedge stood out over them as an angle, almost
like a thatched roof of the lane. And the burning evening sky
looked down at them through the tangle with red eyes as of an
army of goblins. Turnbull hoisted himself up and broke the hedge with his body. As
his head and shoulders rose above it they turned to flame in the
full glow as if lit up by an immense firelight. His red hair and
beard looked almost scarlet, and his pale face as bright as a
boy's. Something violent, something that was at once love and
hatred, surged in the strange heart of the Gael below him. He had
an unutterable sense of epic importance, as if he were somehow
lifting all humanity into a prouder and more passionate region of
the air. As he swung himself up also into the evening light he
felt as if he were rising on enormous wings. Legends of the morning of the world which he had heard in
childhood or read in youth came back upon him in a cloudy
splendour, purple tales of wrath and friendship, like Roland and
Oliver, or Balin and Balan, reminding him of emotional
entanglements. Men who had loved each other and then fought each
other; men who had fought each other and then loved each other,
together made a mixed but monstrous sense of momentousness. The
crimson seas of the sunset seemed to him like a bursting out of
some sacred blood, as if the heart of the world had broken. Turnbull was wholly unaffected by any written or spoken poetry;
his was a powerful and prosaic mind. But even upon him there came
for the moment something out of the earth and the passionate ends
of the sky. The only evidence was in his voice, which was still
practical but a shade more quiet. "Do you see that summer-house-looking thing over there?" he asked
shortly. "That will do for us very well." Keeping himself free from the tangle of the hedge he strolled
across a triangle of obscure kitchen garden, and approached a
dismal shed or lodge a yard or two beyond it. It was a
weather-stained hut of grey wood, which with all its desolation
retained a tag or two of trivial ornament, which suggested that
the thing had once been a sort of summer-house, and the place
probably a sort of garden. "That is quite invisible from the road," said Turnbull, as he
entered it, "and it will cover us up for the night." MacIan looked at him gravely for a few moments. "Sir," he said,
"I ought to say something to you. I ought to say----"

"Hush," said Turnbull, suddenly lifting his hand; "be still,
man." In the sudden silence, the drumming of the distant horses grew
louder and louder with inconceivable rapidity, and the cavalcade
of police rushed by below them in the lane, almost with the roar
and rattle of an express train. "I ought to tell you," continued MacIan, still staring stolidly
at the other, "that you are a great chief, and it is good to go
to war behind you." Turnbull said nothing, but turned and looked out of the foolish
lattice of the little windows, then he said, "We must have food
and sleep first." When the last echo of their eluded pursuers had died in the
distant uplands, Turnbull began to unpack the provisions with the
easy air of a man at a picnic. He had just laid out the last
items, put a bottle of wine on the floor, and a tin of salmon on
the window-ledge, when the bottomless silence of that forgotten
place was broken. And it was broken by three heavy blows of a
stick delivered upon the door. Turnbull looked up in the act of opening a tin and stared
silently at his companion. MacIan's long, lean mouth had shut
hard. "Who the devil can that be?" said Turnbull. "God knows," said the other. "It might be God." Again the sound of the wooden stick reverberated on the wooden
door. It was a curious sound and on consideration did not
resemble the ordinary effects of knocking on a door for
admittance. It was rather as if the point of a stick were plunged
again and again at the panels in an absurd attempt to make a hole
in them. A wild look sprang into MacIan's eyes and he got up half
stupidly, with a kind of stagger, put his hand out and caught one
of the swords. "Let us fight at once," he cried, "it is the end
of the world." "You're overdone, MacIan," said Turnbull, putting him on one
side. "It's only someone playing the goat. Let me open the
door." But he also picked up a sword as he stepped to open it. He paused one moment with his hand on the handle and then flung
the door open. Almost as he did so the ferrule of an ordinary
bamboo cane came at his eyes, so that he had actually to parry it
with the naked weapon in his hands. As the two touched, the point
of the stick was dropped very abruptly, and the man with the
stick stepped hurriedly back. Against the heraldic background of sprawling crimson and gold
offered him by the expiring sunset, the figure of the man with
the stick showed at first merely black and fantastic. He was a
small man with two wisps of long hair that curled up on each
side, and seen in silhouette, looked like horns.