Rosamond
and Laura looked at her and one another with surprise, for it was the
same little girl whom they had seen weaving lace. "Is not it she?" whispered Rosamond to her sister. "Yes, it is; but hush," said Laura, "she does not know us. Don't say a
word, let us hear what she will say." Laura got behind the rest of the company as she spoke, so that the little
girl could not see her. "Vastly well!" said Bell's mother; "I am waiting to see how long you will
have the assurance to stand there with that innocent look. Did you ever
see that basket before?" "Yes, ma'am," said the girl. "YES, MA'AM!" cried the maid; "and what else do you know about it? You
had better confess it at once, and mistress, perhaps, will say no more
about it." "Yes, do confess it," added Bell, earnestly. "Confess what, madam?" said the little girl; "I never touched the basket,
madam." "You never TOUCHED it; but you confess," interrupted Bell's mother, "that
you DID SEE it before. And, pray, how came you to see it? You must have
opened my wardrobe." "No, indeed, ma'am," said the little girl; "but I was waiting in the
passage, ma'am, and this door was partly open; and looking at the maid,
you know, I could not help seeing it." "Why, how could you see through the doors of my wardrobe?" rejoined the
lady. The maid, frightened, pulled the little girl by the sleeve. "Answer me," said the lady, "where did you see this basket?" Another
stronger pull. "I saw it, madam, in her hands," looking at the maid; "and--"

"Well, and what became of it afterwards?" "Ma'am"--hesitating--"miss pulled, and by accident--I believe, I saw,
ma'am--miss, you know what I saw." "I do not know--I do not know; and if I did, you had no business there;
and mamma won't believe you, I am sure." Everybody else, however, did
believe; and their eyes were fixed upon Bell in a manner which made her
feel rather ashamed. "What do you all look at me so for? Why do you all look so? And am I to
be put to shame on my birthday?" cried she, bursting into a roar of
passion; "and all for this nasty thing!" added she, pushing away the
remains of the basket, and looking angrily at Rosamond. "Bell! Bell! O, fie! fie!--Now I am ashamed of you; that's quite rude
to your cousin," said her mother, who was more shocked at her daughter's
want of politeness than at her falsehood. "Take her away, Nancy, till
she has done crying," added she to the maid, who accordingly carried off
her pupil. Rosamond, during this scene, especially at the moment when her present
was pushed away with such disdain, had been making reflections upon the
nature of true generosity. A smile from her father, who stood by, a
silent spectator of the catastrophe of the filigree basket, gave rise to
these reflections; nor were they entirely dissipated by the condolence of
the rest of the company, nor even by the praises of her godmother, who,
for the purpose of condoling with her, said, "Well, my dear Rosamond, I
admire your generous spirit. You know I prophesied that your half-guinea
would be gone the soonest. Did I not, Laura?" said she, appealing, in a
sarcastic tone, to where she thought Laura was. "Where is Laura? I
don't see her." Laura came forward. "You are too PRUDENT to throw away
your money like your sister. Your half-guinea, I'll answer for it, is
snug in your pocket--Is it not?" "No, madam," answered she, in a low voice. But low as the voice of Laura was, the poor little lace-girl heard it;
and now, for the first time, fixing her eyes upon Laura, recollected her
benefactress. "Oh, that's the young lady!" she exclaimed, in a tone of
joyful gratitude, "the good, good young lady, who gave me the half-
guinea, and would not stay to be thanked for it; but I WILL thank her
now." "The half-guinea, Laura!" said her godmother. "What is all this?" "I'll tell you, madam, if you please," said the little girl. It was not in expectation of being praised for it, that Laura had been
generous, and therefore everybody was really touched with the history of
the weaving-pillow; and whilst they praised, felt a certain degree of
respect, which is not always felt by those who pour forth eulogiums. RESPECT is not an improper word, even applied to a child of Laura's age;
for let the age or situation of the person be what it may, they command
respect who deserve it. "Ah, madam!" said Rosamond to her godmother, "now you see--you see she is
NOT a little miser. I'm sure that's better than wasting half a guinea
upon a filigree basket; is it not, ma'am?" said she, with an eagerness
which showed that she had forgotten all her own misfortunes in sympathy
with her sister. "This is being REALLY GENEROUS, father, is it not?" "Yes, Rosamond," said her father, and he kissed her; "this IS being
really generous. It is not only by giving away money that we can show
generosity; it is by giving up to others anything that we like ourselves:
and therefore," added he, smiling, "it is really generous of you to give
your sister the thing you like best of all others." "The thing I like the best of all others, father," said Rosamond, half
pleased, half vexed. "What is that, I wonder? You don't mean PRAISE, do
you, sir?" "Nay, you must decide that yourself, Rosamond." "Why, sir," said she, ingenuously, "perhaps it WAS ONCE the thing I liked
best; but the pleasure I have just felt makes me like something else much
better." ETON MONTEM. [Extracted from the "Courier" of May, 1799.] "Yesterday this triennial ceremony took place, with which the public are
too well acquainted to require a particular description. A collection,
called Salt, is taken from the public, which forms a purse, to support
the Captain of the School in his studies at Cambridge. This collection
is made by the Scholars, dressed in fancy dresses, all round the country. "At eleven o'clock, the youths being assembled in their habiliments at
the College, the Royal Family set off from the Castle to see them, and,
after walking round the Courtyard, they proceeded to Salt Hill in the
following order:--

"His Majesty, his Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, and the Earl of
Uxbridge. "Their Royal Highnesses the Dukes of Kent and Cumberland, Earl Morton,
and General Gwynne, all on horseback, dressed in the Windsor uniform,
except the Prince of Wales, who wore a suit of dark blue, and a brown
surtout over. "Then followed the Scholars, preceded by the Marechal Serjeant, the
Musicians of the Staffordshire Band, and Mr. Ford, Captain of the
Seminary, the Serjeant Major, Serjeants, Colonels, Corporals, Musicians,
Ensign, Lieutenant, Steward, Salt Bearers, Polemen, and Runners. "The cavalcade was brought up by her Majesty and her amiable daughters in
two carriages, and a numerous company of equestrians and pedestrians, all
eager to behold their Sovereign and his family. Among the former, Lady
Lade was foremost in the throng; only two others dared venture their
persons on horseback in such a multitude. "The King and Royal Family were stopped on Eton Bridge by Messrs. Young
and Mansfield, the Salt Bearers, to whom their Majesties delivered their
customary donation of fifty guineas each. "At Salt Hill, his Majesty, with his usual affability, took upon himself
to arrange the procession round the Royal carriages; and even when the
horses were taken off, with the assistance of the Duke of Kent, fastened
the traces round the pole of the coaches, to prevent any inconvenience. "An exceeding heavy shower of rain coming on, the Prince took leave, and
went to the 'Windmill Inn,' till it subsided. The King and his
attendants weathered it out in their great-coats. "After the young gentlemen walked round the carriage, Ensign Vince and
the Salt Bearers proceeded to the summit of the hill; but the wind being
boisterous, he could not exhibit his dexterity in displaying his flag,
and the space being too small before the carriages, from the concourse of
spectators, the King kindly acquiesced in not having it displayed under
such inconvenience. "Their Majesties and the Princesses then returned home, the King
occasionally stopping to converse with the Dean of Windsor, the Earl of
Harrington, and other noblemen. "The Scholars partook of an elegant dinner at the 'Windmill Inn,' and in
the evening walked on Windsor Terrace. "Their Royal Highnesses the Prince of Wales and Duke of Cumberland, after
taking leave of their Majesties, set off for town, and honoured the Opera
House with their presence in the evening. "The profit arising from the Salt collected, according to account,
amounted to 8OO pounds. "The Stadtholder, the Duke of Gordon, Lord and Lady Melbourne, Viscount
Brome, and a numerous train of fashionable nobility, were present. "The following is an account of their dresses, made as usual, very
handsomely, by Mrs. Snow, milliner, of Windsor:--

"Mr. Ford, Captain, with eight Gentlemen to attend him as servitors. "Mr. Sarjeant, Marechal. "Mr. Bradith, Colonel. "Mr. Plumtree, Lieutenant. "Mr. Vince, Ensign. "Mr. Young, College Salt Bearer; white and gold dress, rich satin bag,
covered with gold netting. "Mr. Mansfield, Oppidan, white, purple, and orange dress, trimmed with
silver; rich satin bag, purple and silver:  each carrying elegant poles,
with gold and silver cord. "Mr. Keity, yellow and black velvet; helmet trimmed with silver.