His message
to his ally ran, "I have an intuition." The Professor, with scarcely a pause in his monologue, signalled
back, "Then sit on it." Syme telegraphed, "It is quite extraordinary." The other answered, "Extraordinary rot!" Syme said, "I am a poet." The other retorted, "You are a dead man." Syme had gone quite red up to his yellow hair, and his eyes were
burning feverishly. As he said he had an intuition, and it had
risen to a sort of lightheaded certainty. Resuming his symbolic
taps, he signalled to his friend, "You scarcely realise how poetic
my intuition is. It has that sudden quality we sometimes feel in
the coming of spring." He then studied the answer on his friend's fingers. The answer
was, "Go to hell! " The Professor then resumed his merely verbal monologue addressed
to the Doctor. "Perhaps I should rather say," said Syme on his fingers, "that it
resembles that sudden smell of the sea which may be found in the
heart of lush woods." His companion disdained to reply. "Or yet again," tapped Syme, "it is positive, as is the passionate
red hair of a beautiful woman." The Professor was continuing his speech, but in the middle of it
Syme decided to act. He leant across the table, and said in a
voice that could not be neglected--

"Dr. Bull!" The Doctor's sleek and smiling head did not move, but they could
have sworn that under his dark glasses his eyes darted towards
Syme. "Dr. Bull," said Syme, in a voice peculiarly precise and
courteous, "would you do me a small favour? Would you be so kind
as to take off your spectacles?" The Professor swung round on his seat, and stared at Syme with a
sort of frozen fury of astonishment. Syme, like a man who has
thrown his life and fortune on the table, leaned forward with a
fiery face. The Doctor did not move. For a few seconds there was a silence in which one could hear a
pin drop, split once by the single hoot of a distant steamer on
the Thames. Then Dr. Bull rose slowly, still smiling, and took
off his spectacles. Syme sprang to his feet, stepping backwards a little, like a
chemical lecturer from a successful explosion. His eyes were like
stars, and for an instant he could only point without speaking. The Professor had also started to his feet, forgetful of his
supposed paralysis. He leant on the back of the chair and stared
doubtfully at Dr. Bull, as if the Doctor had been turned into a
toad before his eyes. And indeed it was almost as great a
transformation scene. The two detectives saw sitting in the chair before them a very
boyish-looking young man, with very frank and happy hazel eyes, an
open expression, cockney clothes like those of a city clerk, and
an unquestionable breath about him of being very good and rather
commonplace. The smile was still there, but it might have been the
first smile of a baby. "I knew I was a poet," cried Syme in a sort of ecstasy. "I knew my
intuition was as infallible as the Pope. It was the spectacles that
did it! It was all the spectacles. Given those beastly black eyes,
and all the rest of him his health and his jolly looks, made him a
live devil among dead ones." "It certainly does make a queer difference," said the Professor
shakily. "But as regards the project of Dr. Bull--"

"Project be damned!" roared Syme, beside himself. "Look at him! Look at his face, look at his collar, look at his blessed boots! You don't suppose, do you, that that thing's an anarchist?" "Syme!" cried the other in an apprehensive agony. "Why, by God," said Syme, "I'll take the risk of that myself! Dr.
Bull, I am a police officer. There's my card," and he flung down
the blue card upon the table. The Professor still feared that all was lost; but he was loyal. He
pulled out his own official card and put it beside his friend's. Then the third man burst out laughing, and for the first time that
morning they heard his voice. "I'm awfully glad you chaps have come so early," he said, with
a sort of schoolboy flippancy, "for we can all start for France
together. Yes, I'm in the force right enough," and he flicked a
blue card towards them lightly as a matter of form. Clapping a brisk bowler on his head and resuming his goblin
glasses, the Doctor moved so quickly towards the door, that the
others instinctively followed him. Syme seemed a little distrait,
and as he passed under the doorway he suddenly struck his stick
on the stone passage so that it rang. "But Lord God Almighty," he cried out, "if this is all right, there
were more damned detectives than there were damned dynamiters at
the damned Council!" "We might have fought easily," said Bull; "we were four against
three." The Professor was descending the stairs, but his voice came up from
below. "No," said the voice, "we were not four against three--we were not
so lucky. We were four against One." The others went down the stairs in silence. The young man called Bull, with an innocent courtesy characteristic
of him, insisted on going last until they reached the street; but
there his own robust rapidity asserted itself unconsciously, and he
walked quickly on ahead towards a railway inquiry office, talking
to the others over his shoulder. "It is jolly to get some pals," he said. "I've been half dead with
the jumps, being quite alone. I nearly flung my arms round Gogol
and embraced him, which would have been imprudent. I hope you won't
despise me for having been in a blue funk." "All the blue devils in blue hell," said Syme, "contributed to my
blue funk! But the worst devil was you and your infernal goggles." The young man laughed delightedly. "Wasn't it a rag?" he said. "Such a simple idea--not my own. I
haven't got the brains. You see, I wanted to go into the detective
service, especially the anti-dynamite business. But for that
purpose they wanted someone to dress up as a dynamiter; and they
all swore by blazes that I could never look like a dynamiter. They
said my very walk was respectable, and that seen from behind I
looked like the British Constitution. They said I looked too
healthy and too optimistic, and too reliable and benevolent; they
called me all sorts of names at Scotland Yard. They said that if I
had been a criminal, I might have made my fortune by looking so
like an honest man; but as I had the misfortune to be an honest
man, there was not even the remotest chance of my assisting them by
ever looking like a criminal. But as last I was brought before some
old josser who was high up in the force, and who seemed to have no
end of a head on his shoulders. And there the others all talked
hopelessly. One asked whether a bushy beard would hide my nice
smile; another said that if they blacked my face I might look like
a negro anarchist; but this old chap chipped in with a most
extraordinary remark. 'A pair of smoked spectacles will do it,' he
said positively. 'Look at him now; he looks like an angelic office
boy. Put him on a pair of smoked spectacles, and children will
scream at the sight of him.' And so it was, by George! When once my
eyes were covered, all the rest, smile and big shoulders and short
hair, made me look a perfect little devil. As I say, it was simple
enough when it was done, like miracles; but that wasn't the really
miraculous part of it. There was one really staggering thing about
the business, and my head still turns at it." "What was that?" asked Syme. "I'll tell you," answered the man in spectacles. "This big pot in
the police who sized me up so that he knew how the goggles would
go with my hair and socks--by God, he never saw me at all!" Syme's eyes suddenly flashed on him. "How was that?" he asked. "I thought you talked to him." "So I did," said Bull brightly; "but we talked in a pitch-dark
room like a coalcellar. There, you would never have guessed that."