The Master looked round the room, just showing his perfect teeth
with the perfection of artistic cruelty, exalted for a moment in
the enormous simplicity of his success, and then walked across
the hall and vanished through an inner door. His two lieutenants,
Quayle and Hutton, were left standing at the head of the great
army of servants and keepers. "I hope we shall have no more trouble," said Dr. Quayle
pleasantly enough, and addressing Turnbull, who was leaning
heavily upon the back of a chair. Still looking down, Turnbull lifted the chair an inch or two from
the ground. Then he suddenly swung it above his head and sent it
at the inquiring doctor with an awful crash which sent one of its
wooden legs loose along the floor and crammed the doctor gasping
into a corner. MacIan gave a great shout, snatched up the loose
chair-leg, and, rushing on the other doctor, felled him with a
blow. Twenty attendants rushed to capture the rebels; MacIan
flung back three of them and Turnbull went over on top of one,
when from behind them all came a shriek as of something quite
fresh and frightful. Two of the three passages leading out of the hall were choked
with blue smoke. Another instant and the hall was full of the fog
of it, and red sparks began to swarm like scarlet bees. "The place is on fire!" cried Quayle with a scream of indecent
terror. "Oh, who can have done it? How can it have happened?" A light had come into Turnbull's eyes. "How did the French
Revolution happen?" he asked. "Oh, how should I know!" wailed the other. "Then I will tell you," said Turnbull; "it happened because some
people fancied that a French grocer was as respectable as he
looked." Even as he spoke, as if by confirmation, old Mr. Durand
re-entered the smoky room quite placidly, wiping the petroleum
from his hands with a handkerchief. He had set fire to the
building in accordance with the strict principles of the social
contract. But MacIan had taken a stride forward and stood there shaken and
terrible. "Now," he cried, panting, "now is the judgement of the
world. The doctors will leave this place; the keepers will leave
this place. They will leave us in charge of the machinery and the
machine-guns at the windows. But we, the lunatics, will wait to
be burned alive if only we may see them go." "How do you know we shall go?" asked Hutton, fiercely. "You believe nothing," said MacIan, simply, "and you are
insupportably afraid of death." "So this is suicide," sneered the doctor; "a somewhat doubtful
sign of sanity." "Not at all--this is vengeance," answered Turnbull, quite calmly;
"a thing which is completely healthy." "You think the doctors will go," said Hutton, savagely. "The keepers have gone already," said Turnbull. Even as they spoke the main doors were burst open in mere brutal
panic, and all the officers and subordinates of the asylum rushed
away across the garden pursued by the smoke. But among the
ticketed maniacs not a man or woman moved. "We hate dying," said Turnbull, with composure, "but we hate you
even more. This is a successful revolution." In the roof above their heads a panel shot back, showing a strip
of star-lit sky and a huge thing made of white metal, with the
shape and fins of a fish, swinging as if at anchor. At the same
moment a steel ladder slid down from the opening and struck the
floor, and the cleft chin of the mysterious Master was thrust
into the opening. "Quayle, Hutton," he said, "you will escape
with me." And they went up the ladder like automata of lead. Long after they had clambered into the car, the creature with the
cloven face continued to leer down upon the smoke-stung crowd
below. Then at last he said in a silken voice and with a smile of
final satisfaction:

"By the way, I fear I am very absent minded. There is one man
specially whom, somehow, I always forget. I always leave him
lying about. Once I mislaid him on the Cross of St. Paul's. So
silly of me; and now I've forgotten him in one of those little
cells where your fire is burning. Very unfortunate--especially
for him." And nodding genially, he climbed into his flying ship. MacIan stood motionless for two minutes, and then rushed down one
of the suffocating corridors till he found the flames. Turnbull
looked once at Madeleine, and followed. *                    *                   *

MacIan, with singed hair, smoking garments, and smarting hands
and face, had already broken far enough through the first
barriers of burning timber to come within cry of the cells he had
once known. It was impossible, however, to see the spot where the
old man lay dead or alive; not now through darkness, but through
scorching and aching light. The site of the old half-wit's cell
was now the heart of a standing forest of fire--the flames as
thick and yellow as a cornfield. Their incessant shrieking and
crackling was like a mob shouting against an orator. Yet through
all that deafening density MacIan thought he heard a small and
separate sound. When he heard it he rushed forward as if to
plunge into that furnace, but Turnbull arrested him by an elbow. "Let me go!" cried Evan, in agony; "it's the poor old beggar's
voice--he's still alive, and shouting for help." "Listen!" said Turnbull, and lifted one finger from his clenched
hand. "Or else he is shrieking with pain," protested MacIan. "I will
not endure it." "Listen!" repeated Turnbull, grimly. "Did you ever hear anyone
shout for help or shriek with pain in that voice?" The small shrill sounds which came through the crash of the
conflagration were indeed of an odd sort, and MacIan turned a
face of puzzled inquiry to his companion. "He is singing," said Turnbull, simply. A remaining rampart fell, crushing the fire, and through the
diminished din of it the voice of the little old lunatic came
clearer. In the heart of that white-hot hell he was singing like
a bird. What he was singing it was not very easy to follow, but
it seemed to be something about playing in the golden hay. "Good Lord!" cried Turnbull, bitterly, "there seem to be some
advantages in really being an idiot." Then advancing to the
fringe of the fire he called out on chance to the invisible
singer: "Can you come out? Are you cut off?" "God help us all!" said MacIan, with a shudder; "he's laughing
now." At whatever stage of being burned alive the invisible now found
himself, he was now shaking out peals of silvery and hilarious
laughter. As he listened, MacIan's two eyes began to glow, as if
a strange thought had come into his head. "Fool, come out and save yourself!" shouted Turnbull. "No, by Heaven! that is not the way," cried Evan, suddenly. "Father," he shouted, "come out and save us all!" The fire, though it had dropped in one or two places, was, upon
the whole, higher and more unconquerable than ever. Separate tall
flames shot up and spread out above them like the fiery cloisters
of some infernal cathedral, or like a grove of red tropical trees
in the garden of the devil. Higher yet in the purple hollow of
the night the topmost flames leapt again and again fruitlessly at
the stars, like golden dragons chained but struggling. The towers
and domes of the oppressive smoke seemed high and far enough to
drown distant planets in a London fog. But if we exhausted all
frantic similes for that frantic scene, the main impression about
the fire would still be its ranked upstanding rigidity and a sort
of roaring stillness. It was literally a wall of fire. "Father," cried MacIan, once more, "come out of it and save us
all!" Turnbull was staring at him as he cried. The tall and steady forest of fire must have been already a
portent visible to the whole circle of land and sea. The red
flush of it lit up the long sides of white ships far out in the
German Ocean, and picked out like piercing rubies the windows in
the villages on the distant heights. If any villagers or sailors
were looking towards it they must have seen a strange sight as
MacIan cried out for the third time. That forest of fire wavered, and was cloven in the centre; and
then the whole of one half of it leaned one way as a cornfield
leans all one way under the load of the wind. Indeed, it looked
as if a great wind had sprung up and driven the great fire
aslant. Its smoke was no longer sent up to choke the stars, but
was trailed and dragged across county after county like one
dreadful banner of defeat. But it was not the wind; or, if it was the wind, it was two
winds blowing in opposite directions. For while one half of the
huge fire sloped one way towards the inland heights, the other
half, at exactly the same angle, sloped out eastward towards the
sea.