"I have made a most wretched discovery," said he, after a short pause.--
"I have been here a week to-morrow--half my time. I never knew
days fly so fast. A week to-morrow!--And I have hardly begun to
enjoy myself. But just got acquainted with Mrs. Weston, and others!--
I hate the recollection." "Perhaps you may now begin to regret that you spent one whole day,
out of so few, in having your hair cut." "No," said he, smiling, "that is no subject of regret at all. I have no pleasure in seeing my friends, unless I can believe myself
fit to be seen." The rest of the gentlemen being now in the room, Emma found herself
obliged to turn from him for a few minutes, and listen to Mr. Cole. When Mr. Cole had moved away, and her attention could be restored
as before, she saw Frank Churchill looking intently across the room
at Miss Fairfax, who was sitting exactly opposite. "What is the matter?" said she. He started. "Thank you for rousing me," he replied. "I believe
I have been very rude; but really Miss Fairfax has done her hair
in so odd a way--so very odd a way--that I cannot keep my eyes
from her. I never saw any thing so outree!--Those curls!--This must
be a fancy of her own. I see nobody else looking like her!--
I must go and ask her whether it is an Irish fashion. Shall I?--
Yes, I will--I declare I will--and you shall see how she takes it;--
whether she colours." He was gone immediately; and Emma soon saw him standing before Miss
Fairfax, and talking to her; but as to its effect on the young lady,
as he had improvidently placed himself exactly between them, exactly
in front of Miss Fairfax, she could absolutely distinguish nothing. Before he could return to his chair, it was taken by Mrs. Weston. "This is the luxury of a large party," said she:--"one can get
near every body, and say every thing. My dear Emma, I am longing
to talk to you. I have been making discoveries and forming plans,
just like yourself, and I must tell them while the idea is fresh. Do you know how Miss Bates and her niece came here?" "How?--They were invited, were not they?" "Oh! yes--but how they were conveyed hither?--the manner of their coming?" "They walked, I conclude. How else could they come?" "Very true.--Well, a little while ago it occurred to me how very sad
it would be to have Jane Fairfax walking home again, late at night,
and cold as the nights are now. And as I looked at her, though I
never saw her appear to more advantage, it struck me that she
was heated, and would therefore be particularly liable to take cold. Poor girl! I could not bear the idea of it; so, as soon as Mr. Weston
came into the room, and I could get at him, I spoke to him about
the carriage. You may guess how readily he came into my wishes;
and having his approbation, I made my way directly to Miss Bates,
to assure her that the carriage would be at her service before it took
us home; for I thought it would be making her comfortable at once. Good soul! she was as grateful as possible, you may be sure. `Nobody was ever so fortunate as herself!' --but with many,
many thanks--`there was no occasion to trouble us, for Mr. Knightley's
carriage had brought, and was to take them home again.' I was
quite surprized;--very glad, I am sure; but really quite surprized. Such a very kind attention--and so thoughtful an attention!--
the sort of thing that so few men would think of. And, in short,
from knowing his usual ways, I am very much inclined to think
that it was for their accommodation the carriage was used at all. I do suspect he would not have had a pair of horses for himself,
and that it was only as an excuse for assisting them." "Very likely," said Emma--"nothing more likely. I know no man
more likely than Mr. Knightley to do the sort of thing--to do any
thing really good-natured, useful, considerate, or benevolent. He is not a gallant man, but he is a very humane one; and this,
considering Jane Fairfax's ill-health, would appear a case
of humanity to him;--and for an act of unostentatious kindness,
there is nobody whom I would fix on more than on Mr. Knightley. I know he had horses to-day--for we arrived together; and I laughed at
him about it, but he said not a word that could betray." "Well," said Mrs. Weston, smiling, "you give him credit for
more simple, disinterested benevolence in this instance than I do;
for while Miss Bates was speaking, a suspicion darted into my head,
and I have never been able to get it out again. The more I think
of it, the more probable it appears. In short, I have made a match
between Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax. See the consequence
of keeping you company!--What do you say to it?" "Mr. Knightley and Jane Fairfax!" exclaimed Emma. "Dear Mrs. Weston,
how could you think of such a thing?--Mr. Knightley!--Mr. Knightley
must not marry!--You would not have little Henry cut out from Donwell?--
Oh! no, no, Henry must have Donwell. I cannot at all consent to
Mr. Knightley's marrying; and I am sure it is not at all likely. I am amazed that you should think of such a thing." "My dear Emma, I have told you what led me to think of it. I do not want the match--I do not want to injure dear little Henry--
but the idea has been given me by circumstances; and if Mr. Knightley
really wished to marry, you would not have him refrain on Henry's
account, a boy of six years old, who knows nothing of the matter?" "Yes, I would. I could not bear to have Henry supplanted.--
Mr. Knightley marry!--No, I have never had such an idea, and I
cannot adopt it now. And Jane Fairfax, too, of all women!" "Nay, she has always been a first favourite with him, as you
very well know." "But the imprudence of such a match!" "I am not speaking of its prudence; merely its probability." "I see no probability in it, unless you have any better foundation
than what you mention. His good-nature, his humanity, as I tell you,
would be quite enough to account for the horses. He has a great
regard for the Bateses, you know, independent of Jane Fairfax--
and is always glad to shew them attention. My dear Mrs. Weston,
do not take to match-making. You do it very ill.  Jane Fairfax mistress
of the Abbey!--Oh! no, no;--every feeling revolts. For his own sake,
I would not have him do so mad a thing." "Imprudent, if you please--but not mad. Excepting inequality of fortune,
and perhaps a little disparity of age, I can see nothing unsuitable." "But Mr. Knightley does not want to marry. I am sure he has not the
least idea of it. Do not put it into his head. Why should he marry?--
He is as happy as possible by himself; with his farm, and his sheep,
and his library, and all the parish to manage; and he is extremely
fond of his brother's children. He has no occasion to marry,
either to fill up his time or his heart." "My dear Emma, as long as he thinks so, it is so; but if he really
loves Jane Fairfax--"

"Nonsense! He does not care about Jane Fairfax. In the way
of love, I am sure he does not. He would do any good to her,
or her family; but--"

"Well," said Mrs. Weston, laughing, "perhaps the greatest good he
could do them, would be to give Jane such a respectable home." "If it would be good to her, I am sure it would be evil to himself;
a very shameful and degrading connexion. How would he bear to have
Miss Bates belonging to him?--To have her haunting the Abbey,
and thanking him all day long for his great kindness in marrying Jane?--
`So very kind and obliging!--But he always had been such a very
kind neighbour!' And then fly off, through half a sentence,
to her mother's old petticoat. `Not that it was such a very old
petticoat either--for still it would last a great while--and, indeed,
she must thankfully say that their petticoats were all very strong.'" "For shame, Emma! Do not mimic her. You divert me against
my conscience. And, upon my word, I do not think Mr. Knightley would
be much disturbed by Miss Bates. Little things do not irritate him. She might talk on; and if he wanted to say any thing himself, he would
only talk louder, and drown her voice. But the question is not,
whether it would be a bad connexion for him, but whether he wishes it;
and I think he does. I have heard him speak, and so must you,
so very highly of Jane Fairfax! The interest he takes in her--
his anxiety about her health--his concern that she should have no
happier prospect! I have heard him express himself so warmly on
those points!--Such an admirer of her performance on the pianoforte,
and of her voice! I have heard him say that he could listen to her
for ever. Oh! and I had almost forgotten one idea that occurred
to me--this pianoforte that has been sent here by somebody--
though we have all been so well satisfied to consider it a present
from the Campbells, may it not be from Mr. Knightley?