At that tasted fruit 
The sun, as from Thyestean banquet, turned 
His course intended; else, how had the world 
Inhabited, though sinless, more than now, 
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat? These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced 
Like change on sea and land; sideral blast, 
Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot, 
Corrupt and pestilent:  Now from the north 
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore, 
Bursting their brazen dungeon, armed with ice, 
And snow, and hail, and stormy gust and flaw, 
Boreas, and Caecias, and Argestes loud, 
And Thrascias, rend the woods, and seas upturn; 
With adverse blast upturns them from the south 
Notus, and Afer black with thunderous clouds 
From Serraliona; thwart of these, as fierce, 
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds, 
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noise, 
Sirocco and Libecchio. Thus began 
Outrage from lifeless things; but Discord first, 
Daughter of Sin, among the irrational 
Death introduced, through fierce antipathy: 
Beast now with beast 'gan war, and fowl with fowl, 
And fish with fish; to graze the herb all leaving, 
Devoured each other; nor stood much in awe 
Of Man, but fled him; or, with countenance grim, 
Glared on him passing. These were from without 
The growing miseries, which Adam saw 
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade, 
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within; 
And, in a troubled sea of passion tost, 
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint. O miserable of happy! Is this the end 
Of this new glorious world, and me so late 
The glory of that glory, who now become 
Accursed, of blessed? hide me from the face 
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth 
Of happiness!--Yet well, if here would end 
The misery; I deserved it, and would bear 
My own deservings; but this will not serve: 
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget, 
Is propagated curse. O voice, once heard 
Delightfully, Encrease and multiply; 
Now death to hear! for what can I encrease, 
Or multiply, but curses on my head? Who of all ages to succeed, but, feeling 
The evil on him brought by me, will curse 
My head? Ill fare our ancestor impure, 
For this we may thank Adam! but his thanks 
Shall be the execration: so, besides 
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me 
Shall with a fierce reflux on me rebound; 
On me, as on their natural center, light 
Heavy, though in their place. O fleeting joys 
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes! Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay 
To mould me Man? did I solicit thee 
From darkness to promote me, or here place 
In this delicious garden? As my will 
Concurred not to my being, it were but right 
And equal to reduce me to my dust; 
Desirous to resign and render back 
All I received; unable to perform 
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold 
The good I sought not. To the loss of that, 
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added 
The sense of endless woes? Inexplicable 
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out 
To deathless pain? How gladly would I meet 
Mortality my sentence, and be earth 
Insensible! How glad would lay me down 
As in my mother's lap! There I should rest, 
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more 
Would thunder in my ears; no fear of worse 
To me, and to my offspring, would torment me 
With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt 
Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die; 
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man 
Which God inspired, cannot together perish 
With this corporeal clod; then, in the grave, 
Or in some other dismal place, who knows 
But I shall die a living death? O thought 
Horrid, if true! Yet why? It was but breath 
Of life that sinned; what dies but what had life 
And sin? The body properly had neither, 
All of me then shall die: let this appease 
The doubt, since human reach no further knows. For though the Lord of all be infinite, 
Is his wrath also? Be it, Man is not so, 
But mortal doomed. How can he exercise 
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end? Can he make deathless death? That were to make 
Strange contradiction, which to God himself 
Impossible is held; as argument 
Of weakness, not of power. Will he draw out, 
For anger's sake, finite to infinite, 
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour, 
Satisfied never? That were to extend 
His sentence beyond dust and Nature's law; 
By which all causes else, according still 
To the reception of their matter, act; 
Not to the extent of their own sphere. But say 
That death be not one stroke, as I supposed, 
Bereaving sense, but endless misery 
From this day onward; which I feel begun 
Both in me, and without me; and so last 
To perpetuity;--Ay me!that fear 
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution 
On my defenceless head; both Death and I 
Am found eternal, and incorporate both; 
Nor I on my part single; in me all 
Posterity stands cursed:  Fair patrimony 
That I must leave ye, Sons! O, were I able 
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none! So disinherited, how would you bless 
Me, now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind, 
For one man's fault, thus guiltless be condemned, 
It guiltless? But from me what can proceed, 
But all corrupt; both mind and will depraved 
Not to do only, but to will the same 
With me? How can they then acquitted stand 
In sight of God? Him, after all disputes, 
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain, 
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still 
But to my own conviction: first and last 
On me, me only, as the source and spring 
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due; 
So might the wrath! Fond wish!couldst thou support 
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear; 
Than all the world much heavier, though divided 
With that bad Woman? Thus, what thou desirest, 
And what thou fearest, alike destroys all hope 
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable 
Beyond all past example and future; 
To Satan only like both crime and doom. O Conscience! into what abyss of fears 
And horrours hast thou driven me; out of which 
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged! Thus Adam to himself lamented loud, 
Through the still night; not now, as ere Man fell, 
Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black air 
Accompanied; with damps, and dreadful gloom; 
Which to his evil conscience represented 
All things with double terrour:  On the ground 
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground; and oft 
Cursed his creation;  Death as oft accused 
Of tardy execution, since denounced 
The day of his offence. Why comes not Death, 
Said he, with one thrice-acceptable stroke 
To end me? Shall Truth fail to keep her word, 
Justice Divine not hasten to be just? But Death comes not at call; Justice Divine 
Mends not her slowest pace for prayers or cries, 
O woods, O fountains, hillocks, dales, and bowers! With other echo late I taught your shades 
To answer, and resound far other song.-- 
Whom thus afflicted when sad Eve beheld, 
Desolate where she sat, approaching nigh, 
Soft words to his fierce passion she assayed: 
But her with stern regard he thus repelled. Out of my sight, thou Serpent! That name best 
Befits thee with him leagued, thyself as false 
And hateful; nothing wants, but that thy shape, 
Like his, and colour serpentine, may show 
Thy inward fraud; to warn all creatures from thee 
Henceforth; lest that too heavenly form, pretended 
To hellish falshood, snare them! But for thee 
I had persisted happy; had not thy pride 
And wandering vanity, when least was safe, 
Rejected my forewarning, and disdained 
Not to be trusted; longing to be seen, 
Though by the Devil himself; him overweening 
To over-reach; but, with the serpent meeting, 
Fooled and beguiled; by him thou, I by thee 
To trust thee from my side; imagined wise, 
Constant, mature, proof against all assaults; 
And understood not all was but a show, 
Rather than solid virtue; all but a rib 
Crooked by nature, bent, as now appears, 
More to the part sinister, from me drawn; 
Well if thrown out, as supernumerary 
To my just number found. O! why did God, 
Creator wise, that peopled highest Heaven 
With Spirits masculine, create at last 
This novelty on earth, this fair defect 
Of nature, and not fill the world at once 
With Men, as Angels, without feminine; 
Or find some other way to generate 
Mankind? This mischief had not been befallen, 
And more that shall befall; innumerable 
Disturbances on earth through female snares, 
And strait conjunction with this sex: for either 
He never shall find out fit mate, but such 
As some misfortune brings him, or mistake; 
Or whom he wishes most shall seldom gain 
Through her perverseness, but shall see her gained 
By a far worse; or, if she love, withheld 
By parents; or his happiest choice too late 
Shall meet, already linked and wedlock-bound 
To a fell adversary, his hate or shame: 
Which infinite calamity shall cause 
To human life, and houshold peace confound. He added not, and from her turned; but Eve, 
Not so repulsed, with tears that ceased not flowing 
And tresses all disordered, at his feet 
Fell humble; and, embracing them, besought 
His peace, and thus proceeded in her plaint. Forsake me not thus, Adam! witness Heaven 
What love sincere, and reverence in my heart 
I bear thee, and unweeting have offended, 
Unhappily deceived! Thy suppliant 
I beg, and clasp thy knees; bereave me not, 
Whereon I live, thy gentle looks, thy aid, 
Thy counsel, in this uttermost distress, 
My only strength and stay:  Forlorn of thee, 
Whither shall I betake me, where subsist? While yet we live, scarce one short hour perhaps, 
Between us two let there be peace; both joining, 
As joined in injuries, one enmity 
Against a foe by doom express assigned us, 
That cruel Serpent:  On me exercise not 
Thy hatred for this misery befallen; 
On me already lost, me than thyself 
More miserable! Both have sinned;but thou 
Against God only; I against God and thee; 
And to the place of judgement will return, 
There with my cries importune Heaven; that all 
The sentence, from thy head removed, may light 
On me, sole cause to thee of all this woe; 
Me, me only, just object of his ire! She ended weeping; and her lowly plight, 
Immoveable, till peace obtained from fault 
Acknowledged and deplored, in Adam wrought 
Commiseration:  Soon his heart relented 
Towards her, his life so late, and sole delight, 
Now at his feet submissive in distress; 
Creature so fair his reconcilement seeking, 
His counsel, whom she had displeased, his aid: 
As one disarmed, his anger all he lost, 
And thus with peaceful words upraised her soon. Unwary, and too desirous, as before, 
So now of what thou knowest not, who desirest 
The punishment all on thyself; alas! Bear thine own first, ill able to sustain 
His full wrath, whose thou feelest as yet least part, 
And my displeasure bearest so ill. If prayers 
Could alter high decrees, I to that place 
Would speed before thee, and be louder heard, 
That on my head all might be visited; 
Thy frailty and infirmer sex forgiven, 
To me committed, and by me exposed. But rise;--let us no more contend, nor blame 
Each other, blamed enough elsewhere; but strive 
In offices of love, how we may lighten 
Each other's burden, in our share of woe; 
Since this day's death denounced, if aught I see, 
Will prove no sudden, but a slow-paced evil; 
A long day's dying, to augment our pain; 
And to our seed (O hapless seed!) derived. To whom thus Eve, recovering heart, replied. Adam, by sad experiment I know 
How little weight my words with thee can find, 
Found so erroneous; thence by just event 
Found so unfortunate:  Nevertheless, 
Restored by thee, vile as I am, to place 
Of new acceptance, hopeful to regain 
Thy love, the sole contentment of my heart 
Living or dying, from thee I will not hide 
What thoughts in my unquiet breast are risen, 
Tending to some relief of our extremes, 
Or end; though sharp and sad, yet tolerable, 
As in our evils, and of easier choice. If care of our descent perplex us most, 
Which must be born to certain woe, devoured 
By Death at last; and miserable it is 
To be to others cause of misery, 
Our own begotten, and of our loins to bring 
Into this cursed world a woeful race, 
That after wretched life must be at last 
Food for so foul a monster; in thy power 
It lies, yet ere conception to prevent 
The race unblest, to being yet unbegot. Childless thou art, childless remain: so Death 
Shall be deceived his glut, and with us two 
Be forced to satisfy his ravenous maw. But if thou judge it hard and difficult, 
Conversing, looking, loving, to abstain 
From love's due rights, nuptial embraces sweet; 
And with desire to languish without hope, 
Before the present object languishing 
With like desire; which would be misery 
And torment less than none of what we dread; 
Then, both ourselves and seed at once to free 
From what we fear for both, let us make short, -- 
Let us seek Death; -- or, he not found, supply 
With our own hands his office on ourselves: 
Why stand we longer shivering under fears, 
That show no end but death, and have the power, 
Of many ways to die the shortest choosing, 
Destruction with destruction to destroy? -- 
She ended here, or vehement despair 
Broke off the rest: so much of death her thoughts 
Had entertained, as dyed her cheeks with pale. But Adam, with such counsel nothing swayed, 
To better hopes his more attentive mind 
Labouring had raised; and thus to Eve replied. Eve, thy contempt of life and pleasure seems 
To argue in thee something more sublime 
And excellent, than what thy mind contemns; 
But self-destruction therefore sought, refutes 
That excellence thought in thee; and implies, 
Not thy contempt, but anguish and regret 
For loss of life and pleasure overloved. Or if thou covet death, as utmost end 
Of misery, so thinking to evade 
The penalty pronounced; doubt not but God 
Hath wiselier armed his vengeful ire, than so 
To be forestalled; much more I fear lest death, 
So snatched, will not exempt us from the pain 
We are by doom to pay; rather, such acts 
Of contumacy will provoke the Highest 
To make death in us live:  Then let us seek 
Some safer resolution, which methinks 
I have in view, calling to mind with heed 
Part of our sentence, that thy seed shall bruise 
The Serpent's head; piteous amends! unless 
Be meant, whom I conjecture, our grand foe, 
Satan; who, in the serpent, hath contrived 
Against us this deceit:  To crush his head 
Would be revenge indeed! which will be lost 
By death brought on ourselves, or childless days 
Resolved, as thou proposest; so our foe 
Shal 'scape his punishment ordained, and we 
Instead shall double ours upon our heads. No more be mentioned then of violence 
Against ourselves; and wilful barrenness, 
That cuts us off from hope; and savours only 
Rancour and pride, impatience and despite, 
Reluctance against God and his just yoke 
Laid on our necks. Remember with what mild 
And gracious temper he both heard, and judged, 
Without wrath or reviling; we expected 
Immediate dissolution, which we thought 
Was meant by death that day; when lo!to thee 
Pains only in child-bearing were foretold, 
And bringing forth; soon recompensed with joy, 
Fruit of thy womb:  On me the curse aslope 
Glanced on the ground; with labour I must earn 
My bread; what harm? Idleness had been worse; 
My labour will sustain me; and, lest cold 
Or heat should injure us, his timely care 
Hath, unbesought, provided; and his hands 
Clothed us unworthy, pitying while he judged; 
How much more, if we pray him, will his ear 
Be open, and his heart to pity incline, 
And teach us further by what means to shun 
The inclement seasons, rain, ice, hail, and snow! Which now the sky, with various face, begins 
To show us in this mountain; while the winds 
Blow moist and keen, shattering the graceful locks 
Of these fair spreading trees; which bids us seek 
Some better shroud, some better warmth to cherish 
Our limbs benummed, ere this diurnal star 
Leave cold the night, how we his gathered beams 
Reflected may with matter sere foment; 
Or, by collision of two bodies, grind 
The air attrite to fire; as late the clouds 
Justling, or pushed with winds, rude in their shock, 
Tine the slant lightning; whose thwart flame, driven down 
Kindles the gummy bark of fir or pine; 
And sends a comfortable heat from far, 
Which might supply the sun:  Such fire to use, 
And what may else be remedy or cure 
To evils which our own misdeeds have wrought, 
He will instruct us praying, and of grace 
Beseeching him; so as we need not fear 
To pass commodiously this life, sustained 
By him with many comforts, till we end 
In dust, our final rest and native home. What better can we do, than, to the place 
Repairing where he judged us, prostrate fall 
Before him reverent; and there confess 
Humbly our faults, and pardon beg; with tears 
Watering the ground, and with our sighs the air 
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign 
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek 
 
 
 
Book XI                                                          
 
 
Undoubtedly he will relent, and turn 
From his displeasure; in whose look serene, 
When angry most he seemed and most severe, 
What else but favour, grace, and mercy, shone? So spake our father penitent; nor Eve 
Felt less remorse: they, forthwith to the place 
Repairing where he judged them, prostrate fell 
Before him reverent; and both confessed 
Humbly their faults, and pardon begged; with tears 
Watering the ground, and with their sighs the air 
Frequenting, sent from hearts contrite, in sign 
Of sorrow unfeigned, and humiliation meek. Thus they, in lowliest plight, repentant stood 
Praying; for from the mercy-seat above 
Prevenient grace descending had removed 
The stony from their hearts, and made new flesh 
Regenerate grow instead; that sighs now breathed 
Unutterable; which the Spirit of prayer 
Inspired, and winged for Heaven with speedier flight 
Than loudest oratory:  Yet their port 
Not of mean suitors; nor important less 
Seemed their petition, than when the ancient pair 
In fables old, less ancient yet than these, 
Deucalion and chaste Pyrrha, to restore 
The race of mankind drowned, before the shrine 
Of Themis stood devout. To Heaven their prayers 
Flew up, nor missed the way, by envious winds 
Blown vagabond or frustrate: in they passed 
Dimensionless through heavenly doors; then clad 
With incense, where the golden altar fumed, 
By their great intercessour, came in sight 
Before the Father's throne: them the glad Son 
Presenting, thus to intercede began. See$ Father, what first-fruits on earth are sprung 
From thy implanted grace in Man; these sighs 
And prayers, which in this golden censer mixed 
With incense, I thy priest before thee bring; 
Fruits of more pleasing savour, from thy seed 
Sown with contrition in his heart, than those 
Which, his own hand manuring, all the trees 
Of Paradise could have produced, ere fallen 
From innocence. Now therefore, bend thine ear 
To supplication; hear his sighs, though mute; 
Unskilful with what words to pray, let me 
Interpret for him; me, his advocate 
And propitiation; all his works on me, 
Good, or not good, ingraft; my merit those 
Shall perfect, and for these my death shall pay. Accept me; and, in me, from these receive 
The smell of peace toward mankind: let him live 
Before thee reconciled, at least his days 
Numbered, though sad; till death, his doom, (which I 
To mitigate thus plead, not to reverse,) 
To better life shall yield him: where with me 
All my redeemed may dwell in joy and bliss; 
Made one with me, as I with thee am one. To whom the Father, without cloud, serene. All thy request for Man, accepted Son, 
Obtain; all thy request was my decree: 
But, longer in that Paradise to dwell, 
The law I gave to Nature him forbids: 
Those pure immortal elements, that know, 
No gross, no unharmonious mixture foul, 
Eject him, tainted now; and purge him off, 
As a distemper, gross, to air as gross, 
And mortal food; as may dispose him best 
For dissolution wrought by sin, that first 
Distempered all things, and of incorrupt 
Corrupted. I, at first, with two fair gifts 
Created him endowed; with happiness, 
And immortality: that fondly lost, 
This other served but to eternize woe; 
Till I provided death: so death becomes 
His final remedy; and, after life, 
Tried in sharp tribulation, and refined 
By faith and faithful works, to second life, 
Waked in the renovation of the just, 
Resigns him up with Heaven and Earth renewed. But let us call to synod all the Blest, 
Through Heaven's wide bounds: from them I will not hide 
My judgements; how with mankind I proceed, 
As how with peccant Angels late they saw, 
And in their state, though firm, stood more confirmed. He ended, and the Son gave signal high 
To the bright minister that watched; he blew 
His trumpet, heard in Oreb since perhaps 
When God descended, and perhaps once more 
To sound at general doom. The angelick blast 
Filled all the regions: from their blisful bowers 
Of amarantine shade, fountain or spring, 
By the waters of life, where'er they sat 
In fellowships of joy, the sons of light 
Hasted, resorting to the summons high; 
And took their seats; till from his throne supreme 
The Almighty thus pronounced his sovran will. O Sons, like one of us Man is become 
To know both good and evil, since his taste 
Of that defended fruit; but let him boast 
His knowledge of good lost, and evil got; 
Happier! had it sufficed him to have known 
Good by itself, and evil not at all. He sorrows now, repents, and prays contrite, 
My motions in him; longer than they move, 
His heart I know, how variable and vain, 
Self-left. Lest therefore his now bolder hand 
Reach also of the tree of life, and eat, 
And live for ever, dream at least to live 
For ever, to remove him I decree, 
And send him from the garden forth to till 
The ground whence he was taken, fitter soil. Michael, this my behest have thou in charge; 
Take to thee from among the Cherubim 
Thy choice of flaming warriours, lest the Fiend, 
Or in behalf of Man, or to invade 
Vacant possession, some new trouble raise: 
Haste thee, and from the Paradise of God 
Without remorse drive out the sinful pair; 
From hallowed ground the unholy; and denounce 
To them, and to their progeny, from thence 
Perpetual banishment.