And what shoulder and what art
 Could twist the sinews of thy heart? And, when thy heart began to beat,
 What dread hand and what dread feet? What the hammer? what the chain? In what furnace was thy brain? What the anvil? what dread grasp
 Dare its deadly terrors clasp? When the stars threw down their spears,
 And watered heaven with their tears,
 Did he smile his work to see? Did he who made the lamb make thee? Tiger, tiger, burning bright
 In the forests of the night,
 What immortal hand or eye
 Dare frame thy fearful symmetry? MY PRETTY ROSE TREE
 
 A flower was offered to me,
   Such a flower as May never bore;
 But I said "I've a pretty rose tree,"
   And I passed the sweet flower o'er. Then I went to my pretty rose tree,
   To tend her by day and by night;
 But my rose turned away with jealousy,
   And her thorns were my only delight. AH SUNFLOWER
 
 Ah Sunflower, weary of time,
   Who countest the steps of the sun;
 Seeking after that sweet golden clime
   Where the traveller's journey is done;
 
 Where the Youth pined away with desire,
   And the pale virgin shrouded in snow,
 Arise from their graves, and aspire
   Where my Sunflower wishes to go! THE LILY
 
 The modest Rose puts forth a thorn,
 The humble sheep a threat'ning horn:
 While the Lily white shall in love delight,
 Nor a thorn nor a threat stain her beauty bright. THE GARDEN OF LOVE
 
 I laid me down upon a bank,
   Where Love lay sleeping;
 I heard among the rushes dank
   Weeping, weeping. Then I went to the heath and the wild,
   To the thistles and thorns of the waste;
 And they told me how they were beguiled,
   Driven out, and compelled to the chaste. I went to the Garden of Love,
   And saw what I never had seen;
 A Chapel was built in the midst,
   Where I used to play on the green. And the gates of this Chapel were shut
   And "Thou shalt not," writ over the door;
 So I turned to the Garden of Love
   That so many sweet flowers bore. And I saw it was filled with graves,
   And tombstones where flowers should be;
 And priests in black gowns were walking their rounds,
   And binding with briars my joys and desires. THE LITTLE VAGABOND
 
 Dear mother, dear mother, the Church is cold;
 But the Alehouse is healthy, and pleasant, and warm. Besides, I can tell where I am used well;
 The poor parsons with wind like a blown bladder swell. But, if at the Church they would give us some ale,
 And a pleasant fire our souls to regale,
 We'd sing and we'd pray all the livelong day,
 Nor ever once wish from the Church to stray. Then the Parson might preach, and drink, and sing,
 And we'd be as happy as birds in the spring;
 And modest Dame Lurch, who is always at church,
 Would not have bandy children, nor fasting, nor birch. And God, like a father, rejoicing to see
 His children as pleasant and happy as he,
 Would have no more quarrel with the Devil or the barrel,
 But kiss him, and give him both drink and apparel. LONDON
 
 I wandered through each chartered street,
   Near where the chartered Thames does flow,
 A mark in every face I meet,
   Marks of weakness, marks of woe. In every cry of every man,
   In every infant's cry of fear,
 In every voice, in every ban,
   The mind-forged manacles I hear:
 
 How the chimney-sweeper's cry
   Every blackening church appals,
 And the hapless soldier's sigh
   Runs in blood down palace-walls. But most, through midnight streets I hear
   How the youthful harlot's curse
 Blasts the new-born infant's tear,
   And blights with plagues the marriage-hearse. THE HUMAN ABSTRACT
 
 Pity would be no more
 If we did not make somebody poor,
 And Mercy no more could be
 If all were as happy as we. And mutual fear brings Peace,
 Till the selfish loves increase
 Then Cruelty knits a snare,
 And spreads his baits with care. He sits down with his holy fears,
 And waters the ground with tears;
 Then Humility takes its root
 Underneath his foot. Soon spreads the dismal shade
 Of Mystery over his head,
 And the caterpillar and fly
 Feed on the Mystery. And it bears the fruit of Deceit,
 Ruddy and sweet to eat,
 And the raven his nest has made
 In its thickest shade. The gods of the earth and sea
 Sought through nature to find this tree,
 But their search was all in vain:
 There grows one in the human Brain. INFANT SORROW
 
 My mother groaned, my father wept:
 Into the dangerous world I leapt,
 Helpless, naked, piping loud,
 Like a fiend hid in a cloud. Struggling in my father's hands,
 Striving against my swaddling-bands,
 Bound and weary, I thought best
 To sulk upon my mother's breast. A POISON TREE
 
 I was angry with my friend:
 I told my wrath, my wrath did end. I was angry with my foe:
 I told it not, my wrath did grow. And I watered it in fears
 Night and morning with my tears,
 And I sunned it with smiles
 And with soft deceitful wiles. And it grew both day and night,
 Till it bore an apple bright,
 And my foe beheld it shine,
 and he knew that it was mine, --
 
 And into my garden stole
 When the night had veiled the pole;
 In the morning, glad, I see
 My foe outstretched beneath the tree. A LITTLE BOY LOST
 
 "Nought loves another as itself,
   Nor venerates another so,
 Nor is it possible to thought
   A greater than itself to know. "And, father, how can I love you 
   Or any of my brothers more? I love you like the little bird
   That picks up crumbs around the door." The Priest sat by and heard the child;
   In trembling zeal he seized his hair,
 He led him by his little coat,
   And all admired the priestly care. And standing on the altar high,
   "Lo, what a fiend is here! said he:
 "One who sets reason up for judge
   Of our most holy mystery." The weeping child could not be heard,
   The weeping parents wept in vain:
 They stripped him to his little shirt,
   And bound him in an iron chain,
 
 And burned him in a holy place
   Where many had been burned before;
 The weeping parents wept in vain. Are such thing done on Albion's shore? A LITTLE GIRL LOST
 
 Children of the future age,
 Reading this indignant page,
 Know that in a former time
 Love, sweet love, was thought a crime. In the age of gold,
 Free from winter's cold,
 Youth and maiden bright,
 To the holy light,
 Naked in the sunny beams delight. Once a youthful pair,
 Filled with softest care,
 Met in garden bright
 Where the holy light
 Had just removed the curtains of the night. Then, in rising day,
 On the grass they play;
 Parents were afar,
 Strangers came not near,
 And the maiden soon forgot her fear. Tired with kisses sweet,
 They agree to meet
 When the silent sleep
 Waves o'er heaven's deep,
 And the weary tired wanderers weep. To her father white
 Came the maiden bright;
 But his loving look,
 Like the holy book
 All her tender limbs with terror shook. "Ona, pale and weak,
 To thy father speak! Oh the trembling fear! Oh the dismal care
 That shakes the blossoms of my hoary hair!" THE SCHOOLBOY
 
 I love to rise on a summer morn, 
   When birds are singing on every tree;
 The distant huntsman winds his horn,
   And the skylark sings with me:
   Oh what sweet company! But to go to school in a summer morn, --
   Oh it drives all joy away! Under a cruel eye outworn,
   The little ones spend the day
   In sighing and dismay. Ah then at times I drooping sit,
   And spend many an anxious hour;
 Nor in my book can I take delight,
   Nor sit in learning's bower,
   Worn through with the dreary shower. How can the bird that is born for joy
   Sit in a cage and sing? How can a child, when fears annoy,
   But droop his tender wing,
   And forget his youthful spring? Oh father and mother, if buds are nipped,
   And blossoms blown away;
 And if the tender plants are stripped
   Of their joy in the springing day,
   By sorrow and care's dismay, --
 
 How shall the summer arise in joy,
   Or the summer fruits appear? Or how shall we gather what griefs destroy,
   Or bless the mellowing year,
   When the blasts of winter appear? TO TERZAH
 
 Whate'er is born of mortal birth
 Must be consumed with the earth,
 To rise from generation free:
 Then what have I to do with thee? The sexes sprang from shame and pride,
 Blown in the morn, in evening died;
 But mercy changed death into sleep;
 The sexes rose to work and weep. Thou, mother of my mortal part,
 With cruelty didst mould my heart,
 And with false self-deceiving tears
 Didst bind my nostrils, eyes, and ears,
 
 Didst close my tongue in senseless clay,
 And me to mortal life betray. The death of Jesus set me free:
 Then what have I to do with thee? THE VOICE OF THE ANCIENT BARD
 
 Youth of delight! come hither
 And see the opening morn,
 Image of Truth new-born. Doubt is fled, and clouds of reason,
 Dark disputes and artful teazing. Folly is an endless maze;
 Tangled roots perplex her ways;
 How many have fallen there! They stumble all night over bones of the dead;
 And feel -- they know not what but care;
 And wish to lead others, when they should be led. APPENDIX

 A DIVINE IMAGE
 
 Cruelty has a human heart,
   And Jealousy a human face;
 Terror the human form divine,
   And Secresy the human dress. The human dress is forged iron,
   The human form a fiery forge,
 The human face a furnace sealed,
   The human heart its hungry gorge. NOTE:  Though written and engraved by Blake, "A DIVINE IMAGE" was never
included in the SONGS OF INNOCENCE AND OF EXPERIENCE. William Blake's 

THE BOOK of THEL


THEL'S Motto

Does the Eagle know what is in the pit? Or wilt thou go ask the Mole:
Can Wisdom be put in a silver rod? Or Love in a golden bowl? THE BOOK of THEL

The Author & Printer Willm. Blake. 1780


THEL

I

The daughters of Mne Seraphim led round their sunny flocks,
All but the youngest: she in paleness sought the secret air. To fade away like morning beauty from her mortal day:
Down by the river of Adona her soft voice is heard;
And thus her gentle lamentation falls like morning dew. O life of this our spring! why fades the lotus of the water? Why fade these children of the spring? born but to smile & fall. Ah! Thel is like a watry bow, and like a parting cloud,
Like a reflection in a glass: like shadows in the water
Like dreams of infants, like a smile upon an infants face. Like the doves voice, like transient day, like music in the air:
Ah! gentle may I lay me down and gentle rest my head. And gentle sleep the sleep of death, and gently hear the voice 
Of him that walketh in the garden in the evening time. The Lilly of the valley breathing in the humble grass
Answerd the lovely maid and said: I am a watry weed,
And I am very small and love to dwell in lowly vales:
So weak the gilded butterfly scarce perches on my head
Yet I am visited from heaven and he that smiles on all
Walks in the valley, and each morn over me spreads his hand
Saying, rejoice thou humble grass, thou new-born lily flower. Thou gentle maid of silent valleys and of modest brooks:
For thou shall be clothed in light, and fed with morning manna:
Till summers heat melts thee beside the fountains and the springs
To flourish in eternal vales: they why should Thel complain. Why should the mistress of the vales of Har, utter a sigh. She ceasd & smild in tears, then sat down in her silver shrine. Thel answerd, O thou little virgin of the peaceful valley. Giving to those that cannot crave, the voiceless, the o'er tired
The breath doth nourish the innocent lamb, he smells the milky garments
He crops thy flowers while thou sittest smiling in his face,
Wiping his mild and meekin mouth from all contagious taints. Thy wine doth purify the golden honey; thy perfume. Which thou dost scatter on every little blade of grass that springs
Revives the milked cow, & tames the fire-breathing steed.