If ever thou gavest hosen and shoon
            Every night and all,
        Sit thee down and put them on,
            And Christ receive thy soul. Turnbull had no such lyrical meditations, but he was in an even
worse temper. At length they came to a pale ribbon of road, edged by a shelf of
rough and almost colourless turf; and a few feet up the slope
there stood grey and weather-stained, one of those big wayside
crucifixes which are seldom seen except in Catholic countries. MacIan put his hand to his head and found that his bonnet was not
there. Turnbull gave one glance at the crucifix--a glance at once
sympathetic and bitter, in which was concentrated the whole of
Swinburne's poem on the same occasion. O hidden face of man, whereover
            The years have woven a viewless veil,
        If thou wert verily man's lover
            What did thy love or blood avail? Thy blood the priests mix poison of,
        And in gold shekels coin thy love. Then, leaving MacIan in his attitude of prayer, Turnbull began to
look right and left very sharply, like one looking for something. Suddenly, with a little cry, he saw it and ran forward. A few
yards from them along the road a lean and starved sort of hedge
came pitifully to an end. Caught upon its prickly angle, however,
there was a very small and very dirty scrap of paper that might
have hung there for months, since it escaped from someone tearing
up a letter or making a spill out of a newspaper. Turnbull
snatched at it and found it was the corner of a printed page,
very coarsely printed, like a cheap novelette, and just large
enough to contain the words: "_et c'est elle qui_----"

"Hurrah!" cried Turnbull, waving his fragment; "we are safe at
last. We are free at last. We are somewhere better than England
or Eden or Paradise. MacIan, we are in the Land of the Duel!" "Where do you say?" said the other, looking at him heavily and
with knitted brows, like one almost dazed with the grey doubts of
desolate twilight and drifting sea. "We are in France!" cried Turnbull, with a voice like a trumpet,
"in the land where things really happen--_Tout arrive en France_. We arrive in France. Look at this little message," and he held
out the scrap of paper. "There's an omen for you superstitious
hill folk. _C'est elle qui--Mais oui, mais oui, c'est elle qui
sauvera encore le monde_." "France!" repeated MacIan, and his eyes awoke again in his head
like large lamps lighted. "Yes, France!" said Turnbull, and all the rhetorical part of him
came to the top, his face growing as red as his hair. "France,
that has always been in rebellion for liberty and reason. France,
that has always assailed superstition with the club of Rabelais
or the rapier of Voltaire. France, at whose first council table
sits the sublime figure of Julian the Apostate. France, where a
man said only the other day those splendid unanswerable
words"--with a superb gesture--"'we have extinguished in heaven
those lights that men shall never light again.'" "No," said MacIan, in a voice that shook with a controlled
passion. "But France, which was taught by St. Bernard and led to
war by Joan of Arc. France that made the crusades. France that
saved the Church and scattered the heresies by the mouths of
Bossuet and Massillon. France, which shows today the conquering
march of Catholicism, as brain after brain surrenders to it,
Brunetière, Coppée, Hauptmann, Barrès, Bourget, Lemaître." "France!" asserted Turnbull with a sort of rollicking
self-exaggeration, very unusual with him, "France, which is one
torrent of splendid scepticism from Abelard to Anatole France." "France," said MacIan, "which is one cataract of clear faith from
St. Louis to Our Lady of Lourdes." "France at least," cried Turnbull, throwing up his sword in
schoolboy triumph, "in which these things are thought about and
fought about. France, where reason and religion clash in one
continual tournament. France, above all, where men understand the
pride and passion which have plucked our blades from their
scabbards. Here, at least, we shall not be chased and spied on by
sickly parsons and greasy policemen, because we wish to put our
lives on the game. Courage, my friend, we have come to the
country of honour." MacIan did not even notice the incongruous phrase "my friend",
but nodding again and again, drew his sword and flung the
scabbard far behind him in the road. "Yes," he cried, in a voice of thunder, "we will fight here and
_He_ shall look on at it." Turnbull glanced at the crucifix with a sort of scowling
good-humour and then said: "He may look and see His cross
defeated." "The cross cannot be defeated," said MacIan, "for it is Defeat." A second afterwards the two bright, blood-thirsty weapons made
the sign of the cross in horrible parody upon each other. They had not touched each other twice, however, when upon the
hill, above the crucifix, there appeared another horrible parody
of its shape; the figure of a man who appeared for an instant
waving his outspread arms. He had vanished in an instant; but
MacIan, whose fighting face was set that way, had seen the shape
momentarily but quite photographically. And while it was like a
comic repetition of the cross, it was also, in that place and
hour, something more incredible. It had been only instantaneously
on the retina of his eye; but unless his eye and mind were going
mad together, the figure was that of an ordinary London
policeman. He tried to concentrate his senses on the sword-play; but one
half of his brain was wrestling with the puzzle; the apocalyptic
and almost seraphic apparition of a stout constable out of
Clapham on top of a dreary and deserted hill in France. He did
not, however, have to puzzle long. Before the duellists had
exchanged half a dozen passes, the big, blue policeman appeared
once more on the top of the hill, a palpable monstrosity in the
eye of heaven. He was waving only one arm now and seemed to be
shouting directions. At the same moment a mass of blue blocked
the corner of the road behind the small, smart figure of
Turnbull, and a small company of policemen in the English uniform
came up at a kind of half-military double. Turnbull saw the stare of consternation in his enemy's face and
swung round to share its cause. When he saw it, cool as he was,
he staggered back. "What the devil are you doing here?" he called out in a high,
shrill voice of authority, like one who finds a tramp in his own
larder. "Well, sir," said the sergeant in command, with that sort of
heavy civility shown only to the evidently guilty, "seems to me
we might ask what are you doing here?" "We are having an affair of honour," said Turnbull, as if it were
the most rational thing in the world. "If the French police like
to interfere, let them interfere. But why the blue blazes should
you interfere, you great blue blundering sausages?" "I'm afraid, sir," said the sergeant with restraint, "I'm afraid
I don't quite follow you." "I mean, why don't the French police take this up if it's got to
be taken up? I always heard that they were spry enough in their
own way." "Well, sir," said the sergeant reflectively, "you see, sir, the
French police don't take this up--well, because you see, sir,
this ain't France. This is His Majesty's dominions, same as
'Ampstead 'eath." "Not France?" repeated Turnbull, with a sort of dull incredulity. "No, sir," said the sergeant; "though most of the people talk
French. This is the island called St. Loup, sir, an island in the
Channel. We've been sent down specially from London, as you were
such specially distinguished criminals, if you'll allow me to say
so. Which reminds me to warn you that anything you say may be
used against you at your trial." "Quite so," said Turnbull, and lurched suddenly against the
sergeant, so as to tip him over the edge of the road with a crash
into the shingle below. Then leaving MacIan and the policemen
equally and instantaneously nailed to the road, he ran a little
way along it, leapt off on to a part of the beach, which he had
found in his journey to be firmer, and went across it with a
clatter of pebbles. His sudden calculation was successful; the
police, unacquainted with the various levels of the loose beach,
tried to overtake him by the shorter cut and found themselves,
being heavy men, almost up to their knees in shoals of slippery
shingle. Two who had been slower with their bodies were quicker
with their minds, and seeing Turnbull's trick, ran along the edge
of the road after him. Then MacIan finally awoke, and leaving
half his sleeve in the grip of the only man who tried to hold
him, took the two policemen in the small of their backs with the
impetus of a cannon-ball and, sending them also flat among the
stones, went tearing after his twin defier of the law. As they were both good runners, the start they had gained was
decisive. They dropped over a high breakwater farther on upon the
beach, turned sharply, and scrambled up a line of ribbed rocks,
crowned with a thicket, crawled through it, scratching their
hands and faces, and dropped into another road; and there found
that they could slacken their speed into a steady trot. In all
this desperate dart and scramble, they still kept hold of their
drawn swords, which now, indeed, in the vigorous phrase of
Bunyan, seemed almost to grow out of their hands. They had run another half mile or so when it became apparent that
they were entering a sort of scattered village. One or two
whitewashed cottages and even a shop had appeared along the side
of the road. Then, for the first time, Turnbull twisted round his
red bear to get a glimpse of his companion, who was a foot or two
behind, and remarked abruptly: "Mr. MacIan, we've been going the
wrong way to work all along. We're traced everywhere, because
everybody knows about us. It's as if one went about with Kruger's
beard on Mafeking Night." "What do you mean?" said MacIan, innocently. "I mean," said Turnbull, with steady conviction, "that what we
want is a little diplomacy, and I am going to buy some in a
shop." XI. A SCANDAL IN THE VILLAGE

In the little hamlet of Haroc, in the Isle of St. Loup, there
lived a man who--though living under the English flag--was
absolutely untypical of the French tradition. He was quite
unnoticeable, but that was exactly where he was quite himself. He
was not even extraordinarily French; but then it is against the
French tradition to be extraordinarily French. Ordinary
Englishmen would only have thought him a little old-fashioned;
imperialistic Englishmen would really have mistaken him for the
old John Bull of the caricatures. He was stout; he was quite
undistinguished; and he had side-whiskers, worn just a little
longer than John Bull's.