Excellent Ifaith, of the Camelions dish: I eate
the Ayre promise-cramm'd, you cannot feed Capons so

   King. I haue nothing with this answer Hamlet, these
words are not mine

   Ham. No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you plaid once
i'th' Vniuersity, you say? Polon. That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good
Actor

   Ham. And what did you enact? Pol. I did enact Iulius Caesar, I was kill'd i'th' Capitol:
Brutus kill'd me

   Ham. It was a bruite part of him, to kill so Capitall a
Calfe there. Be the Players ready? Rosin. I my Lord, they stay vpon your patience

   Qu. Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me

   Ha. No good Mother, here's Mettle more attractiue

   Pol. Oh ho, do you marke that? Ham. Ladie, shall I lye in your Lap? Ophe. No my Lord

   Ham. I meane, my Head vpon your Lap? Ophe. I my Lord

   Ham. Do you thinke I meant Country matters? Ophe. I thinke nothing, my Lord

   Ham. That's a faire thought to ly betweene Maids legs
  Ophe. What is my Lord? Ham. Nothing

   Ophe. You are merrie, my Lord? Ham. Who I? Ophe. I my Lord

   Ham. Oh God, your onely Iigge-maker: what should
a man do, but be merrie. For looke you how cheerefully
my Mother lookes, and my Father dyed within's two
Houres

   Ophe. Nay, 'tis twice two moneths, my Lord

   Ham. So long? Nay then let the Diuel weare blacke,
for Ile haue a suite of Sables. Oh Heauens! dye two moneths
ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope, a
great mans Memorie, may out-liue his life halfe a yeare:
But byrlady he must builde Churches then: or else shall
he suffer not thinking on, with the Hoby-horsse, whose
Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot. Hoboyes play. The dumbe shew enters. Enter a King and Queene, very louingly; the Queene embracing
him. She
kneeles, and makes shew of Protestation vnto him. He takes her
vp, and
declines his head vpon her neck. Layes him downe vpon a Banke
of Flowers. She seeing him a-sleepe, leaues him. Anon comes in a Fellow,
takes off his
Crowne, kisses it, and powres poyson in the Kings eares, and
Exits. The
Queene returnes, findes the King dead, and makes passionate
Action. The
Poysoner, with some two or three Mutes comes in againe, seeming
to lament
with her. The dead body is carried away: The Poysoner Wooes the
Queene with
Gifts, she seemes loath and vnwilling awhile, but in the end,
accepts his
loue. Exeunt. Ophe. What meanes this, my Lord? Ham. Marry this is Miching Malicho, that meanes
Mischeefe

   Ophe. Belike this shew imports the Argument of the
Play? Ham. We shall know by these Fellowes: the Players
cannot keepe counsell, they'l tell all

   Ophe. Will they tell vs what this shew meant? Ham. I, or any shew that you'l shew him. Bee not
you asham'd to shew, hee'l not shame to tell you what it
meanes

   Ophe. You are naught, you are naught, Ile marke the
Play. Enter Prologue. For vs, and for our Tragedie,
Heere stooping to your Clemencie:
We begge your hearing Patientlie

   Ham. Is this a Prologue, or the Poesie of a Ring? Ophe. 'Tis briefe my Lord

   Ham. As Womans loue. Enter King and his Queene. King. Full thirtie times hath Phoebus Cart gon round,
Neptunes salt Wash, and Tellus Orbed ground:
And thirtie dozen Moones with borrowed sheene,
About the World haue times twelue thirties beene,
Since loue our hearts, and Hymen did our hands
Vnite comutuall, in most sacred Bands

   Bap. So many iournies may the Sunne and Moone
Make vs againe count o're, ere loue be done. But woe is me, you are so sicke of late,
So farre from cheere, and from your former state,
That I distrust you: yet though I distrust,
Discomfort you (my Lord) it nothing must:
For womens Feare and Loue, holds quantitie,
In neither ought, or in extremity:
Now what my loue is, proofe hath made you know,
And as my Loue is siz'd, my Feare is so

   King. Faith I must leaue thee Loue, and shortly too:
My operant Powers my Functions leaue to do:
And thou shalt liue in this faire world behinde,
Honour'd, belou'd, and haply, one as kinde. For Husband shalt thou-
  Bap. Oh confound the rest:
Such Loue, must needs be Treason in my brest:
In second Husband, let me be accurst,
None wed the second, but who kill'd the first

   Ham. Wormwood, Wormwood

   Bapt. The instances that second Marriage moue,
Are base respects of Thrift, but none of Loue. A second time, I kill my Husband dead,
When second Husband kisses me in Bed

   King. I do beleeue you. Think what now you speak:
But what we do determine, oft we breake:
Purpose is but the slaue to Memorie,
Of violent Birth, but poore validitie:
Which now like Fruite vnripe stickes on the Tree,
But fall vnshaken, when they mellow bee. Most necessary 'tis, that we forget
To pay our selues, what to our selues is debt:
What to our selues in passion we propose,
The passion ending, doth the purpose lose. The violence of other Greefe or Ioy,
Their owne ennactors with themselues destroy:
Where Ioy most Reuels, Greefe doth most lament;
Greefe ioyes, Ioy greeues on slender accident. This world is not for aye, nor 'tis not strange
That euen our Loues should with our Fortunes change. For 'tis a question left vs yet to proue,
Whether Loue lead Fortune, or else Fortune Loue. The great man downe, you marke his fauourites flies,
The poore aduanc'd, makes Friends of Enemies:
And hitherto doth Loue on Fortune tend,
For who not needs, shall neuer lacke a Frend:
And who in want a hollow Friend doth try,
Directly seasons him his Enemie. But orderly to end, where I begun,
Our Willes and Fates do so contrary run,
That our Deuices still are ouerthrowne,
Our thoughts are ours, their ends none of our owne. So thinke thou wilt no second Husband wed. But die thy thoughts, when thy first Lord is dead

   Bap. Nor Earth to giue me food, nor Heauen light,
Sport and repose locke from me day and night:
Each opposite that blankes the face of ioy,
Meet what I would haue well, and it destroy:
Both heere, and hence, pursue me lasting strife,
If once a Widdow, euer I be Wife

   Ham. If she should breake it now

   King. 'Tis deepely sworne:
Sweet, leaue me heere a while,
My spirits grow dull, and faine I would beguile
The tedious day with sleepe

   Qu. Sleepe rocke thy Braine,

Sleepes

And neuer come mischance betweene vs twaine. Exit

  Ham. Madam, how like you this Play?