(An ephah is about three pecks.) David rose early in the morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, and
took the corn and the loaves and the cheeses, as his father had
commanded him, and went to the camp of the Israelites. The camp stood on a mountain on the one side, and the Philistines stood
on a mountain on the other side; and there was a valley between. David
came to the place where the Israelites were, just as the host was going
forth to the fight, shouting for the battle. So he left his gifts in the
hands of the keeper of the baggage, and ran into the army, amongst the
soldiers, to find his brothers. When he found them, he saluted them and
began to talk with them. But while he was asking them the questions his father had commanded,
there arose a great shouting and tumult among the Israelites, and men
came running back from the front line of battle; everything became
confusion. David looked to see what the trouble was, and he saw a
strange sight: down the slope of the opposite mountain came striding a
Philistine warrior, calling out something in a taunting voice; he was a
gigantic man, the largest David had ever seen, and he was covered with
armour, that shone in the sun: he had a helmet of brass upon his head,
and he was armed with a coat of mail, and he had greaves of brass upon
his legs, and a target of brass between his shoulders; his spear was so
tremendous that the staff of it was like a weaver's beam, and his shield
so great that a man went before him, to carry it. "Who is that?" asked David. "It is Goliath, of Gath, champion of the Philistines," said the soldiers
about. "Every day, for forty days, he has come forth, so, and challenged
us to send a man against him, in single combat; and since no one dares
to go out against him alone, the armies cannot fight." (That was one of
the laws of warfare in those times.) "What!" said David, "does none dare go out against him?" As he spoke, the giant stood still, on the hillside opposite the host
of Israel, and shouted his challenge, scornfully. He said, "Why are ye
come out to set your battle in array? Am I not a Philistine, and ye
servants of Saul? Choose you a man, and let him come down to me. If he
be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants;
but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our
servants, and serve us. I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a
man, that we may fight together!" When King Saul heard these words, he was dismayed, and all the men of
Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him and were sore afraid. David
heard them talking among themselves, whispering and murmuring. They were
saying, "Have ye seen this man that is come up? Surely if anyone killeth
him that man will the king make rich; perhaps he will give him his
daughter in marriage, and make his family free in Israel!" David heard this, and he asked the men if it were so. It was surely so,
they said. "But," said David, "who is this Philistine, that he should defy the
armies of the living God?" And he was stirred with anger. Very soon, some of the officers told the king about the youth who was
asking so many questions, and who said that it was shame upon Israel
that a mere Philistine should defy the armies of the living God. Immediately Saul sent for him. When David came before Saul, he said to
the king, "Let no man's heart fail because of him; thy servant will go
and fight with this Philistine." But Saul looked at David, and said, "Thou art not able to go against
this Philistine, to fight with him, for thou art but a youth, and he has
been a man of war from his youth." Then David said to Saul, "Once I was keeping my father's sheep, and
there came a lion, and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock; and I
went out after the lion, and struck him; and delivered the lamb out of
his mouth, and when he arose against me, I caught him by the beard, and
struck him, and slew him! Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear;
and this Philistine shall be as one of them, for he hath defied the
armies of the living God. The Lord, who delivered me out of the paw of
the lion and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the
hand of this Philistine." "Go," said Saul, "and the Lord be with thee!" And he armed David with his own armour,--he put a helmet of brass upon
his head, and armed him with a coat of mail. But when David girded his
sword upon his armour, and tried to walk, he said to Saul, "I cannot go
with these, for I am not used to them." And he put them off. Then he took his staff in his hand and went and chose five smooth stones
out of the brook, and put them in a shepherd's bag which he had; and his
sling was in his hand; and he went out and drew near to the Philistine. And the Philistine came on and drew near to David; and the man that bore
his shield went before him. And when the Philistine looked about and saw
David, he disdained him, for David was but a boy, and ruddy, and of a
fair countenance. And he said to David, "Am I a dog, that thou comest to
me with a cudgel?" And with curses he cried out again, "Come to me, and
I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts of
the field." But David looked at him, and answered, "Thou comest to me with a sword,
and with a spear, and with a shield; but I come to thee in the name of
the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast
defied. This day will the Lord deliver thee into my hand, and I will
smite thee, and take thy head from thee, and I will give the carcasses
of the host of the Philistines this day unto the fowls of the air, and
to the wild beasts of the earth, that all the earth may know that there
is a God in Israel! And all this assembly shall know that the Lord
saveth not with sword and spear; for the battle is the Lord's, and he
will give you into our hands." And then, when the Philistine arose, and came, and drew nigh to meet
David, David made haste and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine. And when he was a little way from him, he put his hand in his bag, and
took from thence a stone, and put it in his sling, and slung it, and
smote the Philistine in the forehead, so that the stone sank into his
forehead; and he fell on his face to the earth. And David ran, and stood upon the Philistine, and took his sword, and
drew it out of its sheath, and slew him with it. Then, when the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled. But the army of Israel pursued them, and victory was with the men of
Israel. And after the battle, David was taken to the king's tent, and made a
captain over many men; and he went no more to his father's house, to
herd the sheep, but became a man, in the king's service. THE SHEPHERD'S SONG


David had many fierce battles to fight for King Saul against the enemies
of Israel, and he won them all. Then, later, he had to fight against the
king's own soldiers, to save himself, for King Saul grew wickedly
jealous of David's fame as a soldier, and tried to kill him. Twice, when
David had a chance to kill the king, he forbore to harm him; but even
then, Saul continued trying to take his life, and David was kept away
from his home as if he were an enemy. But when King Saul died, the people chose David for their king, because
there was no one so brave, so wise, or so faithful to God. King David
lived a long time, and made his people famous for victory and happiness;
he had many troubles and many wars, but he always trusted that God would
help him, and he never deserted his own people in any hard place. After a battle, or when it was a holiday, or when he was very thankful
for something, King David used to make songs, and sing them before the
people. Some of these songs were so beautiful that they have never been
forgotten. After all these hundreds and hundred of years, we sing them
still; we call them Psalms. Often, after David had made a song, his chief musician would sing with
him, as the people gathered to worship God. Sometimes the singers were
divided into two great choruses, and went to the service in two
processions; then one chorus would sing a verse of David's song, and the
other procession would answer with the next, and then both would sing
together; it was very beautiful to hear. Even now, we sometimes do that
with the songs of David in our churches. One of his Psalms that everybody loves is a song that David made when he
remembered the days before he came to Saul's camp. He remembered the
days and nights he used to spend in the fields with the sheep, when he
was just a shepherd-boy; and he thought to himself that God had taken
care of him just as carefully as he himself used to care for the little
lambs. It is a beautiful song; I wish we knew the music that David made
for it, but we only know his words. I will tell it to you now, and then
you may learn it, to say for yourselves. The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures; he leadeth me
     beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul; he leadeth me in the paths of
     righteousness for his name's sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
     death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod
     and thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine
     enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth
     over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
     life; and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.=




THE HIDDEN SERVANTS


This is a legend about a hermit who lived long ago. He lived high up on
the mountainside in a tiny cave; his food was roots and acorns, a bit of
bread given by a peasant, or a cheese brought by a woman who wanted his
prayers; his work was praying, and thinking about God. For forty years
he lived so, preaching to the people, praying for them, comforting them
in trouble, and, most of all, worshipping in his heart. There was just
one thing he cared about: it was to make his soul so pure and perfect
that it could be one of the stones in God's great Temple of Heaven. One day, after the forty years, he had a great longing to know how far
along he had got with his work,--how it looked to the Heavenly Father. And he prayed that he might be shown a man--

     "Whose soul in the heavenly grace had grown
      To the selfsame measure as his own;
      Whose treasure on the celestial shore
      Could neither be less than his nor more." As he looked up from his prayer, a white-robed angel stood in the path
before him. The hermit bowed before the messenger with great gladness,
for he knew that his wish was answered. "Go to the nearest town," the
angel said, "and there, in the public square, you will find a mountebank
(a clown) making the people laugh for money. He is the man you seek; his
soul has grown to the selfsame stature as your own; his treasure on the
celestial shore is neither less than yours nor more." When the angel had faded from sight, the hermit bowed his head again,
but this time with great sorrow and fear. Had his forty years of prayer
been a terrible mistake, and was his soul indeed like a clown, fooling
in the market-place? He knew not what to think. Almost he hoped he
should not find the man, and could believe that he had dreamed the angel
vision. But when he came, after a long, tiring walk to the village, and
the square, alas! there was the clown, doing his silly tricks for the
crowd. The hermit stood and looked at him with terror and sadness, for he felt
that he was looking at his own soul. The face he saw was thin and tired,
and though it kept a smile or a grin for the people, it seemed very sad
to the hermit. Soon the man felt the hermit's eyes; he could not go on
with his tricks. And when he had stopped and the crowd had left, the
hermit went and drew the man aside to a place where they could rest; for
he wanted more than anything else on earth to know what the man's soul
was like, because what it was, his was. So, after a little, he asked the clown, very gently, what his life was,
what it had been. And the clown answered, very sadly, that it was just
as it looked,--a life of foolish tricks, for that was the only way of
earning his bread that he knew. "But have you never been anything different?" asked the hermit,
painfully. The clown's head sank in his hands. "Yes, holy father," he said, "I have
been something else.