On a sudden open fly, 
With impetuous recoil and jarring sound, 
Th' infernal doors, and on their hinges grate 
Harsh thunder, that the lowest bottom shook 
Of Erebus. She opened; but to shut 
Excelled her power: the gates wide open stood, 
That with extended wings a bannered host, 
Under spread ensigns marching, mibht pass through 
With horse and chariots ranked in loose array; 
So wide they stood, and like a furnace-mouth 
Cast forth redounding smoke and ruddy flame. Before their eyes in sudden view appear 
The secrets of the hoary Deep--a dark 
Illimitable ocean, without bound, 
Without dimension; where length, breadth, and height, 
And time, and place, are lost; where eldest Night 
And Chaos, ancestors of Nature, hold 
Eternal anarchy, amidst the noise 
Of endless wars, and by confusion stand. For Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry, four champions fierce, 
Strive here for mastery, and to battle bring 
Their embryon atoms: they around the flag 
Of each his faction, in their several clans, 
Light-armed or heavy, sharp, smooth, swift, or slow, 
Swarm populous, unnumbered as the sands 
Of Barca or Cyrene's torrid soil, 
Levied to side with warring winds, and poise 
Their lighter wings. To whom these most adhere 
He rules a moment: Chaos umpire sits, 
And by decision more embroils the fray 
By which he reigns: next him, high arbiter, 
Chance governs all. Into this wild Abyss, 
The womb of Nature, and perhaps her grave, 
Of neither sea, nor shore, nor air, nor fire, 
But all these in their pregnant causes mixed 
Confusedly, and which thus must ever fight, 
Unless th' Almighty Maker them ordain 
His dark materials to create more worlds-- 
Into this wild Abyss the wary Fiend 
Stood on the brink of Hell and looked a while, 
Pondering his voyage; for no narrow frith 
He had to cross. Nor was his ear less pealed 
With noises loud and ruinous (to compare 
Great things with small) than when Bellona storms 
With all her battering engines, bent to rase 
Some capital city; or less than if this frame 
Of Heaven were falling, and these elements 
In mutiny had from her axle torn 
The steadfast Earth. At last his sail-broad vans 
He spread for flight, and, in the surging smoke 
Uplifted, spurns the ground; thence many a league, 
As in a cloudy chair, ascending rides 
Audacious; but, that seat soon failing, meets 
A vast vacuity. All unawares, 
Fluttering his pennons vain, plumb-down he drops 
Ten thousand fathom deep, and to this hour 
Down had been falling, had not, by ill chance, 
The strong rebuff of some tumultuous cloud, 
Instinct with fire and nitre, hurried him 
As many miles aloft. That fury stayed-- 
Quenched in a boggy Syrtis, neither sea, 
Nor good dry land--nigh foundered, on he fares, 
Treading the crude consistence, half on foot, 
Half flying; behoves him now both oar and sail. As when a gryphon through the wilderness 
With winged course, o'er hill or moory dale, 
Pursues the Arimaspian, who by stealth 
Had from his wakeful custody purloined 
The guarded gold; so eagerly the Fiend 
O'er bog or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare, 
With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way, 
And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies. At length a universal hubbub wild 
Of stunning sounds, and voices all confused, 
Borne through the hollow dark, assaults his ear 
With loudest vehemence. Thither he plies 
Undaunted, to meet there whatever Power 
Or Spirit of the nethermost Abyss 
Might in that noise reside, of whom to ask 
Which way the nearest coast of darkness lies 
Bordering on light; when straight behold the throne 
Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread 
Wide on the wasteful Deep! With him enthroned 
Sat sable-vested Night, eldest of things, 
The consort of his reign; and by them stood 
Orcus and Ades, and the dreaded name 
Of Demogorgon; Rumour next, and Chance, 
And Tumult, and Confusion, all embroiled, 
And Discord with a thousand various mouths. T' whom Satan, turning boldly, thus:--"Ye Powers 
And Spirtis of this nethermost Abyss, 
Chaos and ancient Night, I come no spy 
With purpose to explore or to disturb 
The secrets of your realm; but, by constraint 
Wandering this darksome desert, as my way 
Lies through your spacious empire up to light, 
Alone and without guide, half lost, I seek, 
What readiest path leads where your gloomy bounds 
Confine with Heaven; or, if some other place, 
From your dominion won, th' Ethereal King 
Possesses lately, thither to arrive 
I travel this profound. Direct my course: 
Directed, no mean recompense it brings 
To your behoof, if I that region lost, 
All usurpation thence expelled, reduce 
To her original darkness and your sway 
(Which is my present journey), and once more 
Erect the standard there of ancient Night. Yours be th' advantage all, mine the revenge!" Thus Satan; and him thus the Anarch old, 
With faltering speech and visage incomposed, 
Answered:  "I know thee, stranger, who thou art--  *** 
That mighty leading Angel, who of late 
Made head against Heaven's King, though overthrown. I saw and heard; for such a numerous host 
Fled not in silence through the frighted Deep, 
With ruin upon ruin, rout on rout, 
Confusion worse confounded; and Heaven-gates 
Poured out by millions her victorious bands, 
Pursuing. I upon my frontiers here 
Keep residence; if all I can will serve 
That little which is left so to defend, 
Encroached on still through our intestine broils 
Weakening the sceptre of old Night: first, Hell, 
Your dungeon, stretching far and wide beneath; 
Now lately Heaven and Earth, another world 
Hung o'er my realm, linked in a golden chain 
To that side Heaven from whence your legions fell! If that way be your walk, you have not far; 
So much the nearer danger. Go, and speed; 
Havoc, and spoil, and ruin, are my gain." He ceased; and Satan stayed not to reply, 
But, glad that now his sea should find a shore, 
With fresh alacrity and force renewed 
Springs upward, like a pyramid of fire, 
Into the wild expanse, and through the shock 
Of fighting elements, on all sides round 
Environed, wins his way; harder beset 
And more endangered than when Argo passed 
Through Bosporus betwixt the justling rocks, 
Or when Ulysses on the larboard shunned 
Charybdis, and by th' other whirlpool steered. So he with difficulty and labour hard 
Moved on, with difficulty and labour he; 
But, he once passed, soon after, when Man fell, 
Strange alteration! Sin and Death amain, 
Following his track (such was the will of Heaven) 
Paved after him a broad and beaten way 
Over the dark Abyss, whose boiling gulf 
Tamely endured a bridge of wondrous length, 
From Hell continued, reaching th' utmost orb 
Of this frail World; by which the Spirits perverse 
With easy intercourse pass to and fro 
To tempt or punish mortals, except whom 
God and good Angels guard by special grace. But now at last the sacred influence 
Of light appears, and from the walls of Heaven 
Shoots far into the bosom of dim Night 
A glimmering dawn. Here Nature first begins 
Her farthest verge, and Chaos to retire, 
As from her outmost works, a broken foe, 
With tumult less and with less hostile din; 
That Satan with less toil, and now with ease, 
Wafts on the calmer wave by dubious light, 
And, like a weather-beaten vessel, holds 
Gladly the port, though shrouds and tackle torn; 
Or in the emptier waste, resembling air, 
Weighs his spread wings, at leisure to behold 
Far off th' empyreal Heaven, extended wide 
In circuit, undetermined square or round, 
With opal towers and battlements adorned 
Of living sapphire, once his native seat; 
And, fast by, hanging in a golden chain, 
This pendent World, in bigness as a star 
Of smallest magnitude close by the moon. Thither, full fraught with mischievous revenge, 
Accursed, and in a cursed hour, he hies. Book III                                                         
 
 
Hail, holy Light, offspring of Heaven firstborn, 
Or of the Eternal coeternal beam 
May I express thee unblam'd? since God is light, 
And never but in unapproached light 
Dwelt from eternity, dwelt then in thee 
Bright effluence of bright essence increate. Or hear"st thou rather pure ethereal stream, 
Whose fountain who shall tell? before the sun, 
Before the Heavens thou wert, and at the voice 
Of God, as with a mantle, didst invest  *** 
The rising world of waters dark and deep, 
Won from the void and formless infinite. Thee I re-visit now with bolder wing, 
Escap'd the Stygian pool, though long detain'd 
In that obscure sojourn, while in my flight 
Through utter and through middle darkness borne, 
With other notes than to the Orphean lyre 
I sung of Chaos and eternal Night; 
Taught by the heavenly Muse to venture down 
The dark descent, and up to re-ascend, 
Though hard and rare:  Thee I revisit safe, 
And feel thy sovran vital lamp; but thou 
Revisit'st not these eyes, that roll in vain 
To find thy piercing ray, and find no dawn; 
So  thick a drop serene hath quench'd their orbs, 
Or dim suffusion veil'd. Yet not the more 
Cease I to wander, where the Muses haunt, 
Clear spring, or shady grove, or sunny hill, 
Smit with the love of sacred song; but chief 
Thee, Sion, and the flowery brooks beneath, 
That wash thy hallow'd feet, and warbling flow, 
Nightly I visit:  nor sometimes forget 
So were I equall'd with them in renown, 
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace; 
Blind Thamyris, and blind Maeonides, 
And Tiresias, and Phineus, prophets old: 
Then feed on thoughts, that voluntary move 
Harmonious numbers; as the wakeful bird 
Sings darkling, and in shadiest covert hid 
Tunes her nocturnal note. Thus with the year 
Seasons return; but not to me returns 
Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn, 
Or sight of vernal bloom, or summer's rose, 
Or flocks, or herds, or human face divine; 
But cloud instead, and ever-during dark 
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men 
Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair 
Presented with a universal blank 
Of nature's works to me expung'd and ras'd, 
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out. So much the rather thou, celestial Light, 
Shine inward, and the mind through all her powers 
Irradiate; there plant eyes, all mist from thence 
Purge and disperse, that I may see and tell 
Of things invisible to mortal sight. Now had the Almighty Father from above, 
From the pure empyrean where he sits 
High thron'd above all highth, bent down his eye 
His own works and their works at once to view: 
About him all the Sanctities of Heaven 
Stood thick as stars, and from his sight receiv'd 
Beatitude past utterance; on his right 
The radiant image of his glory sat, 
His only son; on earth he first beheld 
Our two first parents, yet the only two 
Of mankind in the happy garden plac'd 
Reaping immortal fruits of joy and love, 
Uninterrupted joy, unrivall'd love, 
In blissful solitude; he then survey'd 
Hell and the gulf between, and Satan there  
Coasting the wall of Heaven on this side Night 
In the dun air sublime, and ready now 
To stoop with wearied wings, and willing feet, 
On the bare outside of this world, that seem'd 
Firm land imbosom'd, without firmament, 
Uncertain which, in ocean or in air. Him God beholding from his prospect high, 
Wherein past, present, future, he beholds, 
Thus to his only Son foreseeing spake. Only begotten Son, seest thou what rage 
Transports our Adversary? whom no bounds 
Prescrib'd no bars of Hell, nor all the chains 
Heap'd on him there, nor yet the main abyss 
Wide interrupt, can hold; so bent he seems 
On desperate revenge, that shall redound 
Upon his own rebellious head. And now, 
Through all restraint broke loose, he wings his way 
Not far off Heaven, in the precincts of light, 
Directly towards the new created world, 
And man there plac'd, with purpose to assay 
If him by force he can destroy, or, worse, 
By some false guile pervert; and shall pervert; 
For man will hearken to his glozing lies, 
And easily transgress the sole command, 
Sole pledge of his obedience:  So will fall 
He and his faithless progeny:  Whose fault? Whose but his own? ingrate, he had of me 
All he could have; I made him just and right, 
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall. Such I created all the ethereal Powers 
And Spirits, both them who stood, and them who fail'd; 
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell. Not free, what proof could they have given sincere 
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love, 
Where only what they needs must do appear'd, 
Not what they would? what praise could they receive? What pleasure I from such obedience paid, 
When will and reason (reason also is choice) 
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoil'd, 
Made passive both, had serv'd necessity, 
Not me? they therefore, as to right belong$ 'd, 
So were created, nor can justly accuse 
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate, 
As if predestination over-rul'd 
Their will dispos'd by absolute decree 
Or high foreknowledge they themselves decreed 
Their own revolt, not I; if I foreknew, 
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault, 
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown. So without least impulse or shadow of fate, 
Or aught by me immutably foreseen, 
They trespass, authors to themselves in all 
Both what they judge, and what they choose; for so 
I form'd them free: and free they must remain, 
Till they enthrall themselves; I else must change 
Their nature, and revoke the high decree 
Unchangeable, eternal, which ordain'd 
$THeir freedom: they themselves ordain'd their fall. The first sort by their own suggestion fell, 
Self-tempted, self-deprav'd:  Man falls, deceiv'd 
By the other first:  Man therefore shall find grace, 
The other none:  In mercy and justice both, 
Through Heaven and Earth, so shall my glory excel; 
But Mercy, first and last, shall brightest shine. Thus while God spake, ambrosial fragrance fill'd 
All Heaven, and in the blessed Spirits elect 
Sense of new joy ineffable diffus'd. Beyond compare the Son of God was seen 
Most glorious; in him all his Father shone 
Substantially express'd; and in his face 
Divine compassion visibly appear'd, 
Love without end, and without measure grace, 
Which uttering, thus he to his Father spake. O Father, gracious was that word which clos'd 
Thy sovran command, that Man should find grace; 
, that Man should find grace; 
For which both Heaven and earth shall high extol 
Thy praises, with the innumerable sound 
Of hymns and sacred songs, wherewith thy throne 
Encompass'd shall resound thee ever blest. For should Man finally be lost, should Man, 
Thy creature late so lov'd, thy youngest son, 
Fall circumvented thus by fraud, though join'd 
With his own folly? that be from thee far, 
That far be from thee, Father, who art judge 
Of all things made, and judgest only right. Or shall the Adversary thus obtain 
His end, and frustrate thine? shall he fulfill 
His malice, and thy goodness bring to nought, 
Or proud return, though to his heavier doom, 
Yet with revenge accomplish'd, and to Hell 
Draw after him the whole race of mankind, 
By him corrupted? or wilt thou thyself 
Abolish thy creation, and unmake 
For him, what for thy glory thou hast made? So should thy goodness and thy greatness both 
Be question'd and blasphem'd without defence. To whom the great Creator thus replied. O son, in whom my soul hath chief delight, 
Son of my bosom, Son who art alone. My word, my wisdom, and effectual might,  
All hast thou spoken as my thoughts are, all 
As my eternal purpose hath decreed; 
Man shall not quite be lost, but sav'd who will; 
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me 
Freely vouchsaf'd; once more I will renew 
His lapsed powers, though forfeit; and enthrall'd 
By sin to foul exorbitant desires; 
Upheld by me, yet once more he shall stand 
On even ground against his mortal foe; 
By me upheld, that he may know how frail 
His fallen condition is, and to me owe 
All his deliverance, and to none but me. Some I have chosen of peculiar grace, 
Elect above the rest; so is my will: 
The rest shall hear me call, and oft be warn'd 
Their sinful state, and to appease betimes 
The incensed Deity, while offer'd grace 
Invites; for I will clear their senses dark, 
What may suffice, and soften stony hearts 
To pray, repent, and bring obedience due. To prayer, repentance, and obedience due, 
Though but endeavour'd with sincere intent, 
Mine ear shall not be slow, mine eye not shut. And I will place within them as a guide, 
My umpire Conscience; whom if they will hear, 
Light after light, well us'd, they shall attain, 
And to the end, persisting, safe arrive. This my long sufferance, and my day of grace, 
They who neglect and scorn, shall never taste; 
But hard be harden'd, blind be blinded more, 
That they may stumble on, and deeper fall; 
And none but such from mercy I exclude. But yet all is not done; Man disobeying, 
Disloyal, breaks his fealty, and sins 
Against the high supremacy of Heaven, 
Affecting God-head, and, so losing all, 
To expiate his treason hath nought left, 
But to destruction sacred and devote, 
He, with his whole posterity, must die, 
Die he or justice must; unless for him 
Some other able, and as willing, pay 
The rigid satisfaction, death for death. Say, heavenly Powers, where shall we find such love? Which of you will be mortal, to redeem 
Man's mortal crime, and just the unjust to save? Dwells in all Heaven charity so dear? And silence was in Heaven: $ on Man's behalf 
He ask'd, but all the heavenly quire stood mute, 
Patron or intercessour none appear'd, 
Much less that durst upon his own head draw 
The deadly forfeiture, and ransom set. And now without redemption all mankind 
Must have been lost, adjudg'd to Death and Hell 
By doom severe, had not the Son of God, 
In whom the fulness dwells of love divine, 
His dearest mediation thus renew'd. Father, thy word is past, Man shall find grace; 
And shall grace not find means, that finds her way, 
The speediest of thy winged messengers, 
To visit all thy creatures, and to all 
Comes unprevented, unimplor'd, unsought? Happy for Man, so coming; he her aid 
Can never seek, once dead in sins, and lost; 
Atonement for himself, or offering meet, 
Indebted and undone, hath none to bring; 
Behold me then:  me for him, life for life 
I offer: on me let thine anger fall; 
Account me Man; I for his sake will leave 
 Thy bosom, and this glory next to thee 
 Freely put off, and for him lastly die 
 Well pleased; on me let Death wreak all his rage. Under his gloomy power I shall not long 
 Lie vanquished. Thou hast given me to possess 
 Life in myself for ever; by thee I live; 
 Though now to Death I yield, and am his due, 
 All that of me can die, yet, that debt paid, 
 $ thou wilt not leave me in the loathsome grave 
 His prey, nor suffer my unspotted soul 
 For ever with corruption there to dwell; 
 But I shall rise victorious, and subdue 
 My vanquisher, spoiled of his vaunted spoil. Death his death's wound shall then receive, and stoop 
 Inglorious, of his mortal sting disarmed; 
 I through the ample air in triumph high 
 Shall lead Hell captive maugre Hell, and show 
The powers of darkness bound. Thou, at the sight 
 Pleased, out of Heaven shalt look down and smile, 
 While, by thee raised, I ruin all my foes; 
 Death last, and with his carcase glut the grave; 
 Then, with the multitude of my redeemed, 
 Shall enter Heaven, long absent, and return, 
 Father, to see thy face, wherein no cloud 
 Of anger shall remain, but peace assured 
 And reconcilement: wrath shall be no more 
 Thenceforth, but in thy presence joy entire. His words here ended; but his meek aspect 
 Silent yet spake, and breathed immortal love 
 To mortal men, above which only shone 
 Filial obedience: as a sacrifice 
 Glad to be offered, he attends the will 
 Of his great Father. Admiration seized 
 All Heaven, what this might mean, and whither tend, 
 Wondering; but soon th' Almighty thus replied. O thou in Heaven and Earth the only peace 
 Found out for mankind under wrath, O thou 
 My sole complacence! Well thou know'st how dear 
 To me are all my works; nor Man the least, 
 Though last created, that for him I spare 
 Thee from my bosom and right hand, to save, 
 By losing thee a while, the whole race lost. 00021053  
 Thou, therefore, whom thou only canst redeem, 
 Their nature also to thy nature join; 
 And be thyself Man among men on Earth, 
 Made flesh, when time shall be, of virgin seed, 
 By wondrous birth; be thou in Adam's room 
The head of all mankind, though Adam's son. As in him perish all men, so in thee, 
As from a second root, shall be restored 
As many as are restored, without thee none. His crime makes guilty all his sons; thy merit, 
Imputed, shall absolve them who renounce 
Their own both righteous and unrighteous deeds, 
And live in thee transplanted, and from thee 
Receive new life. So Man, as is most just, 
Shall satisfy for Man, be judged and die, 
And dying rise, and rising with him raise 
His brethren, ransomed with his own dear life. So heavenly love shall outdo hellish hate, 
Giving to death, and dying to redeem, 
So dearly to redeem what hellish hate 
So easily destroyed, and still destroys 
In those who, when they may, accept not grace. Nor shalt thou, by descending to assume 
Man's nature, lessen or degrade thine own. Because thou hast, though throned in highest bliss 
Equal to God, and equally enjoying 
God-like fruition, quitted all, to save 
A world from utter loss, and hast been found 
By merit more than birthright Son of God, 
Found worthiest to be so by being good, 
Far more than great or high; because in thee 
Love hath abounded more than glory abounds; 
Therefore thy humiliation shall exalt 
With thee thy manhood also to this throne: 
Here shalt thou sit incarnate, here shalt reign 
Both God and Man, Son both of God and Man, 
Anointed universal King; all power 
I give thee; reign for ever, and assume 
Thy merits; under thee, as head supreme, 
Thrones, Princedoms, Powers, Dominions, I reduce: 
All knees to thee shall bow, of them that bide 
In Heaven, or Earth, or under Earth in Hell. When thou, attended gloriously from Heaven, 
Shalt in the sky appear, and from thee send 
The summoning Arch-Angels to proclaim 
Thy dread tribunal; forthwith from all winds, 
The living, and forthwith the cited dead 
Of all past ages, to the general doom 
Shall hasten; such a peal shall rouse their sleep. Then, all thy saints assembled, thou shalt judge 
Bad Men and Angels; they, arraigned, shall sink 
Beneath thy sentence; Hell, her numbers full, 
Thenceforth shall be for ever shut. Mean while 
The world shall burn, and from her ashes spring 
New Heaven and Earth, wherein the just shall dwell, 
And, after all their tribulations long, 
See golden days, fruitful of golden deeds, 
With joy and peace triumphing, and fair truth. Then thou thy regal scepter shalt lay by, 
For regal scepter then no more shall need, 
God shall be all in all. But, all ye Gods, 
Adore him, who to compass all this dies; 
Adore the Son, and honour him as me. No sooner had the Almighty ceased, but all 
The multitude of Angels, with a shout 
Loud as from numbers without number, sweet 
As from blest voices, uttering joy, Heaven rung 
With jubilee, and loud Hosannas filled 
The eternal regions:  Lowly reverent 
Towards either throne they bow, and to the ground 
With solemn adoration down they cast 
Their crowns inwove with amarant and gold; 
Immortal amarant, a flower which once 
In Paradise, fast by the tree of life, 
Began to bloom; but soon for man's offence 
To Heaven removed, where first it grew, there grows, 
And flowers aloft shading the fount of life, 
And where the river of bliss through midst of Heaven 
Rolls o'er Elysian flowers her amber stream; 
With these that never fade the Spirits elect 
Bind their resplendent locks inwreathed with beams; 
Now in loose garlands thick thrown off, the bright 
Pavement, that like a sea of jasper shone, 
Impurpled with celestial roses smiled. Then, crowned again, their golden harps they took, 
Harps ever tuned, that glittering by their side 
Like quivers hung, and with preamble sweet 
Of charming symphony they introduce 
Their sacred song, and waken raptures high; 
No voice exempt, no voice but well could join 
Melodious part, such concord is in Heaven. Thee, Father, first they sung Omnipotent, 
Immutable, Immortal, Infinite, 
Eternal King; the Author of all being, 
Fonntain of light, thyself invisible 
Amidst the glorious brightness where thou sit'st 
Throned inaccessible, but when thou shadest 
The full blaze of thy beams, and, through a cloud 
Drawn round about thee like a radiant shrine, 
Dark with excessive bright thy skirts appear, 
Yet dazzle Heaven, that brightest Seraphim 
Approach not, but with both wings veil their eyes. Thee next they sang of all creation first, 
Begotten Son, Divine Similitude, 
In whose conspicuous countenance, without cloud 
Made visible, the Almighty Father shines, 
Whom else no creature can behold; on thee 
Impressed the effulgence of his glory abides, 
Transfused on thee his ample Spirit rests. He Heaven of Heavens and all the Powers therein 
By thee created; and by thee threw down 
The aspiring Dominations:  Thou that day 
Thy Father's dreadful thunder didst not spare, 
Nor stop thy flaming chariot-wheels, that shook 
Heaven's everlasting frame, while o'er the necks 
Thou drovest of warring Angels disarrayed. Back from pursuit thy Powers with loud acclaim 
Thee only extolled, Son of thy Father's might, 
To execute fierce vengeance on his foes, 
Not so on Man:  Him through their malice fallen, 
Father of mercy and grace, thou didst not doom 
So strictly, but much more to pity incline: 
No sooner did thy dear and only Son 
Perceive thee purposed not to doom frail Man 
So strictly, but much more to pity inclined, 
He to appease thy wrath, and end the strife 
Of mercy and justice in thy face discerned, 
Regardless of the bliss wherein he sat 
Second to thee, offered himself to die 
For Man's offence.