We shall not
dwell upon their consultation; for the amusement of contriving such
expeditions is often the chief thing which induces idle boys to engage in
them. There was a small window at the end of the back staircase, through which,
between nine and ten o'clock at night, Tarlton, accompanied by Loveit and
another boy, crept out. It was a moonlight night, and after crossing the
field, and climbing the gate, directed by Loveit, who now resolved to go
through the affair with spirit, they proceeded down the lane with rash
yet fearful steps. At a distance Loveit saw the white washed cottage, and the apple-tree
beside it. They quickened their pace, and with some difficulty scrambled
through the hedge which fenced the garden, though not without being
scratched and torn by the briers. Everything was silent. Yet now and
then, at every rustling of the leaves, they started, and their hearts
beat violently. Once, as Loveit was climbing the apple-tree, he thought
he heard a door in the cottage open, and earnestly begged his companions
to desist and return home. This, however, he could by no means persuade
them to do, until they had filled their pockets with apples; then, to his
great joy, they returned, crept in at the window and each retired, as
softly as possible, to his own apartment. Loveit slept in the room with Hardy, whom he had left fast asleep, and
whom he now was extremely afraid of awakening. All the apples were
emptied out of Loveit's pockets, and lodged with Tarlton till the
morning, for fear the smell should betray the secret to Hardy. The room
door was apt to creak, but it was opened with such precaution, that no
noise could be heard, and Loveit found his friend as fast asleep as when
he left him. "Ah," said he to himself, "how quietly he sleeps! I wish I had been
sleeping too." The reproaches of Loveit's conscience, however, served no
other purpose but to torment him; he had not sufficient strength of mind
to be good. The very next night, in spite of all his fears, and all his
penitence, and all his resolutions, by a little fresh ridicule and
persuasion he was induced to accompany the same party on a similar
expedition. We must observe, that the necessity for continuing their
depredations became stronger the third day; for, though at first only a
small party had been in the secret, by degrees it was divulged to the
whole school; and it was necessary to secure secrecy by sharing the
booty. Everyone was astonished that Hardy, with all his quickness and
penetration, had not yet discovered their proceedings; but Loveit could
not help suspecting that he was not quite so ignorant as he appeared to
be. Loveit had strictly kept his promise of secrecy; but he was by no
means an artful boy; and in talking to his friend, conscious that he had
something to conceal, he was perpetually on the point of betraying
himself; then recollecting his engagement, he blushed, stammered,
bungled; and upon Hardy's asking what he meant, would answer with a
silly, guilty countenance, that he did not know; or abruptly break off,
saying, "Oh nothing! nothing at all!" It was in vain that he urged Tarlton to permit him to consult his friend. A gloom overspread Tarlton's brow when he began to speak on the subject,
and he always returned a peremptory refusal, accompanied with some such
taunting expression as this--"I wish we had nothing to do with such a
sneaking fellow; he'll betray us all, I see, before we have done with
him." "Well," said Loveit to himself, "so I am abused after all, and called a
sneaking fellow for my pains; that's rather hard, to be sure, when I've
got so little by the job." In truth he had not got much; for in the division of the booty only one
apple, and half of another, which was only half ripe, happened to fall to
his share; though, to be sure, when they had all eaten their apples, he
had the satisfaction to hear everybody declare they were very sorry they
had forgotten to offer some of theirs to "POOR LOVEIT." In the meantime, the visits to the apple-tree had been now too frequently
repeated to remain concealed from the old man who lived in the cottage. He used to examine his only tree very frequently, and missing numbers of
rosy apples, which he had watched ripening, he, though not prone to
suspicion, began to think that there was something going wrong;
especially as a gap was made in his hedge, and there were several small
footsteps in his flower beds. The good old man was not at all inclined to give pain to any living
creature, much less to children, of whom he was particularly fond. Nor
was he in the least avaricious, for though he was not rich, he had enough
to live upon, because he had been very industrious in his youth; and he
was always very ready to part with the little he had. Nor was he a cross
old man. If anything would have made him angry, it would have been the
seeing his favourite tree robbed, as he had promised himself the pleasure
of giving his red apples to his grandchildren on his birthday. However,
he looked up at the tree in sorrow rather than in anger, and leaning upon
his staff, he began to consider what he had best do. "If I complain to their master," said he to himself, "they will certainly
be flogged, and that I should be sorry for:  yet they must not be let to
go on stealing; that would be worse still, for it would surely bring them
to the gallows in the end. Let me see--oh, ay, that will do; I will
borrow farmer Kent's dog Barker, he'll keep them off, I'll answer for
it." Farmer Kent lent his dog Barker, cautioning his neighbour, at the same
time, to be sure to chain him well, for he was the fiercest mastiff in
England. The old man, with farmer Kent's assistance, chained him fast to
the trunk of the apple-tree. Night came; and Tarlton, Loveit and his companions, returned at the usual
hour. Grown bolder now by frequent success, they came on talking and
laughing. But the moment they had set their foot in the garden, the dog
started up; and, shaking the chain as he sprang forward, barked with
unremitting fury. They stood still as if fixed to the spot. There was
just moonlight enough to see the dog. "Let us try the other side of the
tree," said Tarlton. But to whichever side they turned, the dog flew
round in an instant, barking with increased fury. "He'll break his chain and tear us to pieces," cried Tarlton; and, struck
with terror, he immediately threw down the basket he had brought with
him, and betook himself to flight, with the greatest precipitation. "Help me! oh, pray, help me! I can't get through the hedge," cried
Loveit, in a lamentable tone, whilst the dog growled hideously, and
sprang forward to the extremity of his chain. "I can't get out! Oh, for
God's sake, stay for me one minute, dear Tarlton!" He called in vain; he
was left to struggle through his difficulties by himself; and of all his
dear friends not one turned back to help him. At last, torn and
terrified, he got through the hedge and ran home, despising his
companions for their selfishness. Nor could he help observing that
Tarlton, with all his vaunted prowess, was the first to run away from the
appearance of danger. The next morning Loveit could not help reproaching the party with their
conduct. "Why could not you, any of you, stay one minute to help me?" said he. "We did not hear you call," answered one. "I was so frightened," said another, "I would not have turned back for
the whole world." "And you, Tarlton?" "I," said Tarlton; "had not I enough to do to take care of myself, you
blockhead? Everyone for himself in this world!" "So I see," said Loveit, gravely. "Well, man! is there anything strange in that?" "Strange! why, yes; I thought you all loved me!" "Lord love you, lad! so we do; but we love ourselves better." "Hardy would not have served me so, however," said Loveit, turning away
in disgust. Tarlton was alarmed. "Pugh!" said he; "what nonsense have
you taken into your brain! Think no more about it. We are all very
sorry, and beg your pardon; come, shake hands, forgive and forget." Loveit gave his hand, but gave it rather coldly. "I forgive it with all
my heart," said he; "but I cannot forget it so soon!" "Why, then, you are not such a good humoured fellow as we thought you
were. Surely you cannot bear malice, Loveit." Loveit smiled, and
allowed that he certainly could not bear malice. "Well, then, come; you
know at the bottom we all love you, and would do anything in the world
for you." Poor Loveit, flattered in his foible, began to believe that
they did love him at the bottom, as they said, and even with his eyes
open consented again to be duped. "How strange it is," thought he, "that I should set such value upon the
love of those I despise! When I'm once out of this scrape, I'll have no
more to do with them, I'm determined." Compared with his friend Hardy, his new associates did indeed appear
contemptible; for all this time Hardy had treated him with uniform
kindness, avoided to pry into his secrets, yet seemed ready to receive
his confidence, if it had been offered. After school in the evening, as he was standing silently beside Hardy,
who was ruling a sheet of paper for him, Tarlton, in his brutal manner,
came up, and seizing him by the arm, cried, "Come along with me, Loveit,
I've something to say to you." "I can't come now," said Loveit, drawing away his arm. "Ah, do come now," said Tarlton, in a voice of persuasion. "Well, I'll come presently." "Nay, but do, pray; there's a good fellow, come now, because I have
something to say to you." "What is it you've got to say to me? I wish you'd let me alone," said
Loveit; yet at the same time he suffered himself to he led away. Tarlton took particular pains to humour him and bring him into temper
again; and even though he was not very apt to part with his playthings,
went so far as to say, "Loveit, the other day you wanted a top; I'll give
you mine if you desire it." Loveit thanked him, and was overjoyed at the thought of possessing this
top. "But what did you want to say to me just now?" "Ay, we'll talk of that presently; not yet--when we get out of hearing." "Nobody is near us," said Loveit. "Come a little farther however," said Tarlton, looking round
suspiciously. "Well now, well?" "You know the dog that frightened us last night?" "Yes." "It will never frighten us again." "Won't it?