And what do you think! There was a tiny necklace inside! It was a most
beautiful tiny necklace, all made of jewels, and it was just big enough
for a lady mouse. So the little Field Mouse gave the tiny necklace to
his little Mouse-sister. She thought it was perfectly lovely. And when
she wasn't wearing it she kept it in the shiny acorn box. And the little Red Man never knew what had become of it, because he
didn't know where the little Field Mouse lived. ANOTHER LITTLE RED HEN


Once upon a time there was a little Red Hen, who lived on a farm all by
herself. An old Fox, crafty and sly, had a den in the rocks, on a hill
near her house. Many and many a night this old Fox used to lie awake
and think to himself how good that little Red Hen would taste if he
could once get her in his big kettle and boil her for dinner. But he
couldn't catch the little Red Hen, because she was too wise for him. Every time she went out to market she locked the door of the house
behind her, and as soon as she came in again she locked the door behind
her and put the key in her apron pocket, where she kept her scissors and
some sugar candy. At last the old Fox thought out a way to catch the little Red Hen. Early
in the morning he said to his old mother, "Have the kettle boiling when
I come home to-night, for I'll be bringing the little Red Hen for
supper." Then he took a big bag and slung it over his shoulder, and
walked till he came to the little Red Hen's house. The little Red Hen
was just coming out of her door to pick up a few sticks for firewood. So
the old Fox hid behind the wood-pile, and as soon as she bent down to
get a stick, into the house he slipped, and scurried behind the door. In a minute the little Red Hen came quickly in, and shut the door and
locked it. "I'm glad I'm safely in," she said. Just as she said it, she
turned round, and there stood the ugly old Fox, with his big bag over
his shoulder. Whiff! how scared the little Red Hen was! She dropped her
apronful of sticks, and flew up to the big beam across the ceiling. There she perched, and she said to the old Fox, down below, "You may as
well go home, for you can't get me." "Can't I, though!" said the Fox. And what do you think he did? He stood
on the floor underneath the little Red Hen and twirled round in a circle
after his own tail. And as he spun, and spun, and spun, faster, and
faster, and faster, the poor little Red Hen got so dizzy watching him
that she couldn't hold on to the perch. She dropped off, and the old Fox
picked her up and put her in his bag, slung the bag over his shoulder,
and started for home, where the kettle was boiling. He had a very long way to go, up hill, and the little Red Hen was still
so dizzy that she didn't know where she was. But when the dizziness
began to go off, she whisked her little scissors out of her apron
pocket, and snip! she cut a little hole in the bag; then she poked her
head out and saw where she was, and as soon as they came to a good spot
she cut the hole bigger and jumped out herself. There was a great big
stone lying there, and the little Red Hen picked it up and put it in the
bag as quick as a wink. Then she ran as fast as she could till she came
to her own little farmhouse, and she went in and locked the door with
the big key. The old Fox went on carrying the stone and never knew the difference. My, but it bumped him well! He was pretty tired when he got home. But he
was so pleased to think of the supper he was going to have that he did
not mind that at all. As soon as his mother opened the door he said, "Is
the kettle boiling?" "Yes," said his mother; "have you got the little Red Hen?" "I have," said the old Fox. "When I open the bag you hold the cover off
the kettle and I'll shake the bag so that the Hen will fall in, and then
you pop the cover on, before she can jump out." "All right," said his mean old mother; and she stood close by the
boiling kettle, ready to put the cover on. The Fox lifted the big, heavy bag up till it was over the open kettle,
and gave it a shake. Splash! thump! splash! In went the stone and out
came the boiling water, all over the old Fox and the old Fox's mother! And they were scalded to death. But the little Red Hen lived happily ever after, in her own little
farmhouse. THE STORY OF THE LITTLE RID HIN


     There was once't upon a time
       A little small Rid Hin,
     Off in the good ould country
       Where yees ha' nivir bin. Nice and quiet shure she was,
       And nivir did any harrum;
     She lived alane all be herself,
       And worked upon her farrum. There lived out o'er the hill,
       In a great din o' rocks,
     A crafty, shly, and wicked
       Ould folly iv a Fox. This rashkill iv a Fox,
       He tuk it in his head
     He'd have the little Rid Hin:
       So, whin he wint to bed,

     He laid awake and thaught
       What a foine thing 'twad be
     To fetch her home and bile her up
       For his ould marm and he. And so he thaught and thaught,
       Until he grew so thin
     That there was nothin' left of him
       But jist his bones and shkin. But the small Rid Hin was wise,
       She always locked her door,
     And in her pocket pit the key,
       To keep the Fox out shure. But at last there came a schame
       Intil his wicked head,
     And he tuk a great big bag
       And to his mither said,--

     "Now have the pot all bilin'
       Agin the time I come;
     We'll ate the small Rid Hin to-night,
       For shure I'll bring her home." And so away he wint
       Wid the bag upon his back,
     An' up the hill and through the woods
       Saftly he made his track. An' thin he came alang,
       Craping as shtill's a mouse,
     To where the little small Rid Hin
       Lived in her shnug ould house. An' out she comes hersel',
       Jist as he got in sight,
     To pick up shticks to make her fire:
       "Aha!" says Fox, "all right. "Begorra, now, I'll have yees
       Widout much throuble more";
     An' in he shlips quite unbeknownst,
       An' hides be'ind the door. An' thin, a minute afther,
       In comes the small Rid Hin,
     An' shuts the door, and locks it, too,
       An' thinks, "I'm safely in." An' thin she tarns around
       An' looks be'ind the door;
     There shtands the Fox wid his big tail
       Shpread out upon the floor. Dear me! she was so schared
       Wid such a wondrous sight,
     She dropped her apronful of shticks,
       An' flew up in a fright,

     An' lighted on the bame
       Across on top the room;
     "Aha!" says she, "ye don't have me;
       Ye may as well go home." "Aha!" says Fox, "we'll see;
       I'll bring yees down from that." So out he marched upon the floor
       Right under where she sat. An' thin he whiruled around,
       An' round an' round an' round,
     Fashter an' fashter an' fashter,
       Afther his tail on the ground. Until the small Rid Hin
       She got so dizzy, shure,
     Wid lookin' at the Fox's tail,
       She jist dropped on the floor. An' Fox he whipped her up,
       An' pit her in his bag,
     An' off he started all alone,
       Him and his little dag. All day he tracked the wood
       Up hill an' down again;
     An' wid him, shmotherin' in the bag,
       The little small Rid Hin. Sorra a know she knowed
       Awhere she was that day;
     Says she, "I'm biled an' ate up, shure
       An' what'll be to pay?" Thin she betho't hersel',
       An' tuk her schissors out,
     An' shnipped a big hole in the bag,
       So she could look about. An' 'fore ould Fox could think
       She lept right out--she did,
     An' thin picked up a great big shtone,
       An' popped it in instid. An' thin she rins off home,
       Her outside door she locks;
     Thinks she, "You see you don't have me,
       You crafty, shly ould Fox." An' Fox he tugged away
       Wid the great big hivy shtone,
     Thimpin' his shoulders very bad
       As he wint in alone. An' whin he came in sight
       O' his great din o' rocks,
     Jist watchin' for him at the door
       He shpied ould mither Fox. "Have ye the pot a-bilin'?" Says he to ould Fox thin;
     "Shure an' it is, me child," says she;
       "Have ye the small Rid Hin?" "Yes, jist here in me bag,
       As shure as I shtand here;
     Open the lid till I pit her in:
       Open it--nivir fear." So the rashkill cut the shtring,
       An' hild the big bag over;
     "Now when I shake it in," says he,
       "Do ye pit on the cover." "Yis, that I will"; an' thin
       The shtone wint in wid a dash,
     An' the pot o' bilin' wather
       Came over them ker-splash. An' schalted 'em both to death,
       So they couldn't brathe no more;
     An' the little small Rid Hin lived safe,
       Jist where she lived before. THE STORY OF EPAMINONDAS AND HIS AUNTIE


Epaminondas used to go to see his Auntie 'most every day, and she nearly
always gave him something to take home to his Mammy. One day she gave him a big piece of cake; nice, yellow, rich gold-cake. Epaminondas took it in his fist and held it all crunched up tight, like
this, and came along home. By the time he got home there wasn't anything
left but a fistful of crumbs. His Mammy said,--

"What you got there, Epaminondas?" "Cake, Mammy," said Epaminondas. "Cake!" said his Mammy. "Epaminondas, you ain't got the sense you was
born with! That's no way to carry cake. The way to carry cake is to wrap
it all up nice in some leaves and put it in your hat, and put your hat
on your head, and come along home. You hear me, Epaminondas?" "Yes, Mammy," said Epaminondas.