"I should call it thin," said the priest promptly. "I should call it uncommonly thin. But that's the queer thing
about the whole business. The lie is like a schoolboy's. There are only three versions, Dubosc's and Hirsch's and that fancy of mine. Either that note was written by a French officer to ruin a French official;
or it was written by the French official to help German officers;
or it was written by the French official to mislead German officers. Very well. You'd expect a secret paper passing between such people,
officials or officers, to look quite different from that. You'd expect, probably a cipher, certainly abbreviations;
most certainly scientific and strictly professional terms. But this thing's elaborately simple, like a penny dreadful:
`In the purple grotto you will find the golden casket.' It looks as if...
as if it were meant to be seen through at once." Almost before they could take it in a short figure in French uniform
had walked up to their table like the wind, and sat down
with a sort of thump. "I have extraordinary news," said the Duc de Valognes. "I have just come from this Colonel of ours. He is packing up
to leave the country, and he asks us to make his excuses sur le terrain." "What?" cried Flambeau, with an incredulity quite frightful--
"apologize?" "Yes," said the Duke gruffly; "then and there--before everybody--
when the swords are drawn. And you and I have to do it while
he is leaving the country." "But what can this mean?" cried Flambeau. "He can't be afraid of
that little Hirsch! Confound it!" he cried, in a kind of rational rage;
"nobody could be afraid of Hirsch!" "I believe it's some plot!" snapped Valognes--"some plot of
the Jews and Freemasons. It's meant to work up glory for Hirsch..."

     The face of Father Brown was commonplace, but curiously contented;
it could shine with ignorance as well as with knowledge. But there was always one flash when the foolish mask fell,
and the wise mask fitted itself in its place; and Flambeau,
who knew his friend, knew that his friend had suddenly understood. Brown said nothing, but finished his plate of fish. "Where did you last see our precious Colonel?" asked Flambeau,
irritably. "He's round at the Hotel Saint Louis by the Elysee,
where we drove with him. He's packing up, I tell you." "Will he be there still, do you think?" asked Flambeau,
frowning at the table. "I don't think he can get away yet," replied the Duke;
"he's packing to go a long journey..."

     "No," said Father Brown, quite simply, but suddenly standing up,
"for a very short journey. For one of the shortest, in fact. But we may still be in time to catch him if we go there in a motor-cab." Nothing more could be got out of him until the cab swept
round the corner by the Hotel Saint Louis, where they got out,
and he led the party up a side lane already in deep shadow with
the growing dusk. Once, when the Duke impatiently asked whether
Hirsch was guilty of treason or not, he answered rather absently:
"No; only of ambition--like Caesar." Then he somewhat inconsequently added:
"He lives a very lonely life; he has had to do everything for himself." "Well, if he's ambitious, he ought to be satisfied now,"
said Flambeau rather bitterly. "All Paris will cheer him
now our cursed Colonel has turned tail." "Don't talk so loud," said Father Brown, lowering his voice,
"your cursed Colonel is just in front." The other two started and shrank farther back into the shadow
of the wall, for the sturdy figure of their runaway principal
could indeed be seen shuffling along in the twilight in front,
a bag in each hand. He looked much the same as when they first saw him,
except that he had changed his picturesque mountaineering knickers
for a conventional pair of trousers. It was clear he was already
escaping from the hotel. The lane down which they followed him was one of those that
seem to be at the back of things, and look like the wrong side
of the stage scenery. A colourless, continuous wall ran down
one flank of it, interrupted at intervals by dull-hued and
dirt-stained doors, all shut fast and featureless save for
the chalk scribbles of some passing gamin. The tops of trees,
mostly rather depressing evergreens, showed at intervals over
the top of the wall, and beyond them in the grey and purple gloaming
could be seen the back of some long terrace of tall Parisian houses,
really comparatively close, but somehow looking as inaccessible
as a range of marble mountains. On the other side of the lane ran
the high gilt railings of a gloomy park. Flambeau was looking round him in rather a weird way. "Do you know," he said, "there is something about this place that--"

     "Hullo!" called out the Duke sharply; "that fellow's disappeared. Vanished, like a blasted fairy!" "He has a key," explained their clerical friend. "He's only gone
into one of these garden doors," and as he spoke they heard one of
the dull wooden doors close again with a click in front of them. Flambeau strode up to the door thus shut almost in his face,
and stood in front of it for a moment, biting his black moustache
in a fury of curiosity. Then he threw up his long arms and
swung himself aloft like a monkey and stood on the top of the wall,
his enormous figure dark against the purple sky, like the dark tree-tops. The Duke looked at the priest. "Dubosc's escape is
more elaborate than we thought," he said; "but I suppose he is
escaping from France." "He is escaping from everywhere," answered Father Brown. Valognes's eyes brightened, but his voice sank. "Do you mean
suicide?" he asked. "You will not find his body," replied the other. A kind of cry came from Flambeau on the wall above. "My God," he exclaimed in French, "I know what this place is now! Why, it's the back of the street where old Hirsch lives. I thought
I could recognize the back of a house as well as the back of a man." "And Dubosc's gone in there!" cried the Duke, smiting his hip. "Why, they'll meet after all!" And with sudden Gallic vivacity
he hopped up on the wall beside Flambeau and sat there positively
kicking his legs with excitement. The priest alone remained below,
leaning against the wall, with his back to the whole theatre of events,
and looking wistfully across to the park palings and the twinkling,
twilit trees. The Duke, however stimulated, had the instincts of an aristocrat,
and desired rather to stare at the house than to spy on it;
but Flambeau, who had the instincts of a burglar (and a detective),
had already swung himself from the wall into the fork of a straggling tree
from which he could crawl quite close to the only illuminated window
in the back of the high dark house. A red blind had been pulled down
over the light, but pulled crookedly, so that it gaped on one side,
and by risking his neck along a branch that looked as treacherous
as a twig, Flambeau could just see Colonel Dubosc walking about
in a brilliantly-lighted and luxurious bedroom. But close as Flambeau was
to the house, he heard the words of his colleagues by the wall,
and repeated them in a low voice. "Yes, they will meet now after all!" "They will never meet," said Father Brown. "Hirsch was right
when he said that in such an affair the principals must not meet. Have you read a queer psychological story by Henry James,
of two persons who so perpetually missed meeting each other by accident
that they began to feel quite frightened of each other, and to think
it was fate? This is something of the kind, but more curious." "There are people in Paris who will cure them of such morbid fancies,"
said Valognes vindictively. "They will jolly well have to meet
if we capture them and force them to fight." "They will not meet on the Day of Judgement," said the priest. "If God Almighty held the truncheon of the lists, if St Michael
blew the trumpet for the swords to cross--even then, if one of them
stood ready, the other would not come." "Oh, what does all this mysticism mean?" cried the Duc de Valognes,
impatiently; "why on earth shouldn't they meet like other people?" "They are the opposite of each other," said Father Brown,
with a queer kind of smile. "They contradict each other. They cancel out, so to speak." He continued to gaze at the darkening trees opposite, but Valognes
turned his head sharply at a suppressed exclamation from Flambeau. That investigator, peering into the lighted room, had just seen
the Colonel, after a pace or two, proceed to take his coat off. Flambeau's first thought was that this really looked like a fight;
but he soon dropped the thought for another. The solidity and
squareness of Dubosc's chest and shoulders was all a powerful piece
of padding and came off with his coat. In his shirt and trousers
he was a comparatively slim gentleman, who walked across the bedroom to
the bathroom with no more pugnacious purpose than that of washing himself. He bent over a basin, dried his dripping hands and face on a towel,
and turned again so that the strong light fell on his face. His brown complexion had gone, his big black moustache had gone;
he--was clean-shaven and very pate. Nothing remained of the Colonel
but his bright, hawk-like, brown eyes.