36:30
Therefore thus saith the LORD of Jehoiakim king of Judah; He shall
have none to sit upon the throne of David: and his dead body shall be
cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost. 36:31 And I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their
iniquity; and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have
pronounced against them; but they hearkened not. 36:32 Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch the
scribe, the son of Neriah; who wrote therein from the mouth of
Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had
burned in the fire: and there were added besides unto them many like
words. 37:1 And king Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned instead of Coniah the
son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the
land of Judah. 37:2 But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, did
hearken unto the words of the LORD, which he spake by the prophet
Jeremiah. 37:3 And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah and
Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest to the prophet Jeremiah,
saying, Pray now unto the LORD our God for us. 37:4 Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people: for they had
not put him into prison. 37:5 Then Pharaoh's army was come forth out of Egypt: and when the
Chaldeans that besieged Jerusalem heard tidings of them, they departed
from Jerusalem. 37:6 Then came the word of the LORD unto the prophet Jeremiah saying,
37:7 Thus saith the LORD, the God of Israel; Thus shall ye say to the
king of Judah, that sent you unto me to enquire of me; Behold,
Pharaoh's army, which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt
into their own land. 37:8 And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against this city,
and take it, and burn it with fire. 37:9 Thus saith the LORD; Deceive not yourselves, saying, The
Chaldeans shall surely depart from us: for they shall not depart. 37:10 For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans that
fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet
should they rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with
fire. 37:11 And it came to pass, that when the army of the Chaldeans was
broken up from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army, 37:12 Then
Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin,
to separate himself thence in the midst of the people. 37:13 And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward
was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of
Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou fallest away
to the Chaldeans. 37:14 Then said Jeremiah, It is false; I fall not away to the
Chaldeans. But he hearkened not to him: so Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him
to the princes. 37:15 Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote him,
and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for they
had made that the prison. 37:16 When Jeremiah was entered into the dungeon, and into the cabins,
and Jeremiah had remained there many days; 37:17 Then Zedekiah the
king sent, and took him out: and the king asked him secretly in his
house, and said, Is there any word from the LORD? And Jeremiah said,
There is: for, said he, thou shalt be delivered into the hand of the
king of Babylon. 37:18 Moreover Jeremiah said unto king Zedekiah, What have I offended
against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye
have put me in prison? 37:19 Where are now your prophets which
prophesied unto you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come
against you, nor against this land? 37:20 Therefore hear now, I pray
thee, O my lord the king: let my supplication, I pray thee, be
accepted before thee; that thou cause me not to return to the house of
Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there. 37:21 Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit
Jeremiah into the court of the prison, and that they should give him
daily a piece of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread
in the city were spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison. 38:1 Then Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of
Pashur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashur the son of
Malchiah, heard the words that Jeremiah had spoken unto all the
people, saying, 38:2 Thus saith the LORD, He that remaineth in this
city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence: but
he that goeth forth to the Chaldeans shall live; for he shall have his
life for a prey, and shall live. 38:3 Thus saith the LORD, This city shall surely be given into the
hand of the king of Babylon's army, which shall take it. 38:4 Therefore the princes said unto the king, We beseech thee, let
this man be put to death: for thus he weakeneth the hands of the men
of war that remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in
speaking such words unto them: for this man seeketh not the welfare of
this people, but the hurt. 38:5 Then Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in your hand: for the
king is not he that can do any thing against you. 38:6 Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of
Malchiah the son of Hammelech, that was in the court of the prison:
and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon there was no
water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire. 38:7 Now when Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, one of the eunuchs which was
in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon;
the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin; 38:8 Ebedmelech went
forth out of the king's house, and spake to the king saying, 38:9 My
lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to
Jeremiah the prophet, whom they have cast into the dungeon; and he is
like to die for hunger in the place where he is: for there is no more
bread in the city. 38:10 Then the king commanded Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, Take
from hence thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out
of the dungeon, before he die. 38:11 So Ebedmelech took the men with him, and went into the house of
the king under the treasury, and took thence old cast clouts and old
rotten rags, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah. 38:12 And Ebedmelech the Ethiopian said unto Jeremiah, Put now these
old cast clouts and rotten rags under thine armholes under the cords. And Jeremiah did so. 38:13 So they drew up Jeremiah with cords, and took him up out of the
dungeon: and Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison. 38:14 Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet unto
him into the third entry that is in the house of the LORD: and the
king said unto Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from
me. 38:15 Then Jeremiah said unto Zedekiah, If I declare it unto thee,
wilt thou not surely put me to death? and if I give thee counsel, wilt
thou not hearken unto me? 38:16 So Zedekiah the king sware secretly
unto Jeremiah, saying, As the LORD liveth, that made us this soul, I
will not put thee to death, neither will I give thee into the hand of
these men that seek thy life. 38:17 Then said Jeremiah unto Zedekiah, Thus saith the LORD, the God
of hosts, the God of Israel; If thou wilt assuredly go forth unto the
king of Babylon's princes, then thy soul shall live, and this city
shall not be burned with fire; and thou shalt live, and thine house:
38:18 But if thou wilt not go forth to the king of Babylon's princes,
then shall this city be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they
shall burn it with fire, and thou shalt not escape out of their hand. 38:19 And Zedekiah the king said unto Jeremiah, I am afraid of the
Jews that are fallen to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their
hand, and they mock me. 38:20 But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech
thee, the voice of the LORD, which I speak unto thee: so it shall be
well unto thee, and thy soul shall live. 38:21 But if thou refuse to go forth, this is the word that the LORD
hath shewed me: 38:22 And, behold, all the women that are left in the
king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon's
princes, and those women shall say, Thy friends have set thee on, and
have prevailed against thee: thy feet are sunk in the mire, and they
are turned away back. 38:23 So they shall bring out all thy wives and thy children to the
Chaldeans: and thou shalt not escape out of their hand, but shalt be
taken by the hand of the king of Babylon: and thou shalt cause this
city to be burned with fire. 38:24 Then said Zedekiah unto Jeremiah, Let no man know of these
words, and thou shalt not die. 38:25 But if the princes hear that I have talked with thee, and they
come unto thee, and say unto thee, Declare unto us now what thou hast
said unto the king, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to
death; also what the king said unto thee: 38:26 Then thou shalt say
unto them, I presented my supplication before the king, that he would
not cause me to return to Jonathan's house, to die there. 38:27 Then came all the princes unto Jeremiah, and asked him: and he
told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So
they left off speaking with him; for the matter was not perceived. 38:28 So Jeremiah abode in the court of the prison until the day that
Jerusalem was taken: and he was there when Jerusalem was taken. 39:1 In the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month,
came Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army against
Jerusalem, and they besieged it. 39:2 And in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the
ninth day of the month, the city was broken up. 39:3 And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in
the middle gate, even Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris,
Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, with all the residue of the princes of the
king of Babylon. 39:4 And it came to pass, that when Zedekiah the king of Judah saw
them, and all the men of war, then they fled, and went forth out of
the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, by the gate
betwixt the two walls: and he went out the way of the plain. 39:5 But the Chaldeans' army pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah
in the plains of Jericho: and when they had taken him, they brought
him up to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of
Hamath, where he gave judgment upon him. 39:6 Then the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah
before his eyes: also the king of Babylon slew all the nobles of
Judah. 39:7 Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him with chains,
to carry him to Babylon. 39:8 And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the
people, with fire, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem. 39:9 Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive
into Babylon the remnant of the people that remained in the city, and
those that fell away, that fell to him, with the rest of the people
that remained. 39:10 But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the
people, which had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them
vineyards and fields at the same time. 39:11 Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning
Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying, 39:12 Take
him, and look well to him, and do him no harm; but do unto him even as
he shall say unto thee. 39:13 So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushasban,
Rabsaris, and Nergalsharezer, Rabmag, and all the king of Babylon's
princes; 39:14 Even they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of
the prison, and committed him unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son
of Shaphan, that he should carry him home: so he dwelt among the
people. 39:15 Now the word of the LORD came unto Jeremiah, while he was shut
up in the court of the prison, saying, 39:16 Go and speak to
Ebedmelech the Ethiopian, saying, Thus saith the LORD of hosts, the
God of Israel; Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil,
and not for good; and they shall be accomplished in that day before
thee. 39:17 But I will deliver thee in that day, saith the LORD: and thou
shalt not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou art afraid. 39:18 For I will surely deliver thee, and thou shalt not fall by the
sword, but thy life shall be for a prey unto thee: because thou hast
put thy trust in me, saith the LORD. 40:1 The word that came to Jeremiah from the LORD, after that
Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when
he had taken him being bound in chains among all that were carried
away captive of Jerusalem and Judah, which were carried away captive
unto Babylon. 40:2 And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said unto him,
The LORD thy God hath pronounced this evil upon this place. 40:3 Now the LORD hath brought it, and done according as he hath said:
because ye have sinned against the LORD, and have not obeyed his
voice, therefore this thing is come upon you. 40:4 And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which were
upon thine hand. If it seem good unto thee to come with me into
Babylon, come; and I will look well unto thee: but if it seem ill unto
thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear: behold, all the land is
before thee: whither it seemeth good and convenient for thee to go,
thither go. 40:5 Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, Go back also to
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan, whom the king of
Babylon hath made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with
him among the people: or go wheresoever it seemeth convenient unto
thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him victuals and a
reward, and let him go. 40:6 Then went Jeremiah unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah; and
dwelt with him among the people that were left in the land. 40:7 Now when all the captains of the forces which were in the fields,
even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed
unto him men, and women, and children, and of the poor of the land, of
them that were not carried away captive to Babylon; 40:8 Then they
came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and
Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of
Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the
son of a Maachathite, they and their men. 40:9 And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan sware unto them
and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans: dwell in
the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with
you. 40:10 As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, to serve the
Chaldeans, which will come unto us: but ye, gather ye wine, and summer
fruits, and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your
cities that ye have taken. 40:11 Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the
Ammonites, and in Edom, and that were in all the countries, heard that
the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set
over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan; 40:12 Even
all the Jews returned out of all places whither they were driven, and
came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, unto Mizpah, and gathered wine
and summer fruits very much. 40:13 Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, 40:14 And
said unto him, Dost thou certainly know that Baalis the king of the
Ammonites hath sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to slay thee? But
Gedaliah the son of Ahikam believed them not. 40:15 Then Johanan the son of Kareah spake to Gedaliah in Mizpah
secretly saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will slay Ishmael the
son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it: wherefore should he slay
thee, that all the Jews which are gathered unto thee should be
scattered, and the remnant in Judah perish? 40:16 But Gedaliah the
son of Ahikam said unto Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shalt not do
this thing: for thou speakest falsely of Ishmael. 41:1 Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed royal, and the princes of
the king, even ten men with him, came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam
to Mizpah; and there they did eat bread together in Mizpah. 41:2 Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that
were with him, and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan
with the sword, and slew him, whom the king of Babylon had made
governor over the land. 41:3 Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, even with
Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans that were found there, and the
men of war. 41:4 And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah,
and no man knew it, 41:5 That there came certain from Shechem, from
Shiloh, and from Samaria, even fourscore men, having their beards
shaven, and their clothes rent, and having cut themselves, with
offerings and incense in their hand, to bring them to the house of the
LORD. 41:6 And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet
them, weeping all along as he went: and it came to pass, as he met
them, he said unto them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam. 41:7 And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that
Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the midst
of the pit, he, and the men that were with him. 41:8 But ten men were found among them that said unto Ishmael, Slay us
not: for we have treasures in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and
of oil, and of honey. So he forbare, and slew them not among their
brethren. 41:9 Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies of the
men, whom he had slain because of Gedaliah, was it which Asa the king
had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel: and Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah filled it with them that were slain. 41:10 Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people
that were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all the people
that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had
committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam: and Ishmael the son of
Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the
Ammonites. 41:11 But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah had done, 41:12 Then they took all the men, and went to
fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great
waters that are in Gibeon. 41:13 Now it came to pass, that when all the people which were with
Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were with him, then they were glad. 41:14 So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from
Mizpah cast about and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of
Kareah. 41:15 But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight
men, and went to the Ammonites. 41:16 Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the
forces that were with him, all the remnant of the people whom he had
recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after that
he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, even mighty men of war, and
the women, and the children, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought
again from Gibeon: 41:17 And they departed, and dwelt in the
habitation of Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into
Egypt, 41:18 Because of the Chaldeans: for they were afraid of them,
because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land. 42:1 Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of
Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the
least even unto the greatest, came near, 42:2 And said unto Jeremiah
the prophet, Let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before
thee, and pray for us unto the LORD thy God, even for all this
remnant; (for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold
us:) 42:3 That the LORD thy God may shew us the way wherein we may
walk, and the thing that we may do. 42:4 Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard you;
behold, I will pray unto the LORD your God according to your words;
and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever thing the LORD shall answer
you, I will declare it unto you; I will keep nothing back from you. 42:5 Then they said to Jeremiah, The LORD be a true and faithful
witness between us, if we do not even according to all things for the
which the LORD thy God shall send thee to us.