What, ar't a Heathen? how doth thou vnderstand
the Scripture? the Scripture sayes Adam dig'd;
could hee digge without Armes? Ile put another question
to thee; if thou answerest me not to the purpose, confesse
thy selfe-
  Other. Go too

   Clo. What is he that builds stronger then either the
Mason, the Shipwright, or the Carpenter? Other. The Gallowes maker; for that Frame outliues a
thousand Tenants

   Clo. I like thy wit well in good faith, the Gallowes
does well; but how does it well? it does well to those
that doe ill: now, thou dost ill to say the Gallowes is
built stronger then the Church: Argall, the Gallowes
may doe well to thee. Too't againe, Come

   Other. Who builds stronger then a Mason, a Shipwright,
or a Carpenter? Clo. I, tell me that, and vnyoake

   Other. Marry, now I can tell

   Clo. Too't

   Other. Masse, I cannot tell. Enter Hamlet and Horatio a farre off. Clo. Cudgell thy braines no more about it; for your
dull Asse will not mend his pace with beating; and when
you are ask't this question next, say a Graue-maker: the
Houses that he makes, lasts till Doomesday: go, get thee
to Yaughan, fetch me a stoupe of Liquor. Sings. In youth when I did loue, did loue,
me thought it was very sweete:
To contract O the time for a my behoue,
O me thought there was nothing meete

   Ham. Ha's this fellow no feeling of his businesse, that
he sings at Graue-making? Hor. Custome hath made it in him a property of easinesse

   Ham. 'Tis ee'n so; the hand of little Imployment hath
the daintier sense

   Clowne sings. But Age with his stealing steps
hath caught me in his clutch:
And hath shipped me intill the Land,
as if I had neuer beene such

   Ham. That Scull had a tongue in it, and could sing
once: how the knaue iowles it to th' grownd, as if it
were Caines Iaw-bone, that did the first murther: It
might be the Pate of a Polititian which this Asse o're Offices:
one that could circumuent God, might it not? Hor. It might, my Lord

   Ham. Or of a Courtier, which could say, Good Morrow
sweet Lord: how dost thou, good Lord? this
might be my Lord such a one, that prais'd my Lord such
a ones Horse, when he meant to begge it; might it not? Hor. I, my Lord

   Ham. Why ee'n so: and now my Lady Wormes,
Chaplesse, and knockt about the Mazard with a Sextons
Spade; heere's fine Reuolution, if wee had the tricke to
see't. Did these bones cost no more the breeding, but
to play at Loggets with 'em? mine ake to thinke
on't

   Clowne sings. A Pickhaxe and a Spade, a Spade,
for and a shrowding-Sheete:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meete

   Ham. There's another: why might not that bee the
Scull of a Lawyer? where be his Quiddits now? his
Quillets? his Cases? his Tenures, and his Tricks? why
doe's he suffer this rude knaue now to knocke him about
the Sconce with a dirty Shouell, and will not tell him of
his Action of Battery? hum. This fellow might be in's
time a great buyer of Land, with his Statutes, his Recognizances,
his Fines, his double Vouchers, his Recoueries:
Is this the fine of his Fines, and the recouery of his Recoueries,
to haue his fine Pate full of fine Dirt? will his
Vouchers vouch him no more of his Purchases, and double
ones too, then the length and breadth of a paire of
Indentures? the very Conueyances of his Lands will
hardly lye in this Boxe; and must the Inheritor himselfe
haue no more? ha? Hor. Not a iot more, my Lord

   Ham. Is not Parchment made of Sheep-skinnes? Hor. I my Lord, and of Calue-skinnes too

   Ham. They are Sheepe and Calues that seek out assurance
in that. I will speake to this fellow: whose Graue's
this Sir? Clo. Mine Sir:
O a Pit of Clay for to be made,
for such a Guest is meete

   Ham. I thinke it be thine indeed: for thou liest in't

   Clo. You lye out on't Sir, and therefore it is not yours:
for my part, I doe not lye in't; and yet it is mine

   Ham. Thou dost lye in't, to be in't and say 'tis thine:
'tis for the dead, not for the quicke, therefore thou
lyest

   Clo. 'Tis a quicke lye Sir, 'twill away againe from me
to you

   Ham. What man dost thou digge it for? Clo. For no man Sir

   Ham. What woman then? Clo. For none neither

   Ham. Who is to be buried in't? Clo. One that was a woman Sir; but rest her Soule,
shee's dead

   Ham. How absolute the knaue is? wee must speake
by the Carde, or equiuocation will vndoe vs: by the
Lord Horatio, these three yeares I haue taken note of it,
the Age is growne so picked, that the toe of the Pesant
comes so neere the heeles of our Courtier, hee galls his
Kibe. How long hast thou been a Graue-maker? Clo. Of all the dayes i'th' yeare, I came too't that day
that our last King Hamlet o'recame Fortinbras

   Ham. How long is that since? Clo. Cannot you tell that? euery foole can tell that:
It was the very day, that young Hamlet was borne, hee
that was mad, and sent into England

   Ham. I marry, why was he sent into England? Clo. Why, because he was mad; hee shall recouer his
wits there; or if he do not, it's no great matter there

   Ham. Why? Clo. 'Twill not be seene in him, there the men are as
mad as he

   Ham. How came he mad? Clo. Very strangely they say

   Ham. How strangely? Clo. Faith e'ene with loosing his wits

   Ham. Vpon what ground? Clo. Why heere in Denmarke: I haue bin sixeteene
heere, man and Boy thirty yeares

   Ham. How long will a man lie i'th' earth ere he rot? Clo. Ifaith, if he be not rotten before he die (as we haue
many pocky Coarses now adaies, that will scarce hold
the laying in) he will last you some eight yeare, or nine
yeare. A Tanner will last you nine yeare

   Ham. Why he, more then another?