I know the story he'll tell; I overheard it when the
housekeeper was talking to the postman. It's too long to talk
about now, and I expect we're watched, but----"

Something in Turnbull made him want suddenly to be sick on the
grass; the mere healthy and heathen horror of the unclean; the
mere inhumane hatred of the inhuman state of madness. He seemed
to hear all round him the hateful whispers of that place,
innumerable as leaves whispering in the wind, and each of them
telling eagerly some evil that had not happened or some terrific
secret which was not true. All the rationalist and plain man
revolted within him against bowing down for a moment in that
forest of deception and egotistical darkness. He wanted to blow
up that palace of delusions with dynamite; and in some wild way,
which I will not defend, he tried to do it. He looked across at MacIan and said: "Oh, I can't stand this!" "Can't stand what?" asked his opponent, eyeing him doubtfully. "Shall we say the atmosphere?" replied Turnbull; "one can't use
uncivil expressions even to a--deity. The fact is, I don't like
having God for my second." "Sir!" said that being in a state of great offence, "in my
position I am not used to having my favours refused. Do you know
who I am?" The editor of _The Atheist_ turned upon him like one who has lost
all patience, and exploded: "Yes, you are God, aren't you?" he
said, abruptly, "why do we have two sets of teeth?" "Teeth?" spluttered the genteel lunatic; "teeth?" "Yes," cried Turnbull, advancing on him swiftly and with animated
gestures, "why does teething hurt? Why do growing pains hurt? Why
are measles catching? Why does a rose have thorns? Why do
rhinoceroses have horns? Why is the horn on the top of the nose? Why haven't I a horn on the top of my nose, eh?" And he struck
the bridge of his nose smartly with his forefinger to indicate
the place of the omission and then wagged the finger menacingly
at the Creator. "I've often wanted to meet you," he resumed, sternly, after a
pause, "to hold you accountable for all the idiocy and cruelty of
this muddled and meaningless world of yours. You make a hundred
seeds and only one bears fruit. You make a million worlds and
only one seems inhabited. What do you mean by it, eh? What do you
mean by it?" The unhappy lunatic had fallen back before this quite novel form
of attack, and lifted his burnt-out cigarette almost like one
warding off a blow. Turnbull went on like a torrent. "A man died yesterday in Ealing. You murdered him. A girl had the
toothache in Croydon. You gave it her. Fifty sailors were drowned
off Selsey Bill. You scuttled their ship. What have you got to
say for yourself, eh?" The representative of omnipotence looked as if he had left most
of these things to his subordinates; he passed a hand over his
wrinkling brow and said in a voice much saner than any he had yet
used:

"Well, if you dislike my assistance, of course--perhaps the other
gentleman----"

"The other gentleman," cried Turnbull, scornfully, "is a
submissive and loyal and obedient gentleman. He likes the people
who wear crowns, whether of diamonds or of stars. He believes in
the divine right of kings, and it is appropriate enough that he
should have the king for his second. But it is not appropriate to
me that I should have God for my second. God is not good enough. I dislike and I deny the divine right of kings. But I dislike
more and I deny more the divine right of divinity." Then after a pause in which he swallowed his passion, he said to
MacIan: "You have got the right second, anyhow." The Highlander did not answer, but stood as if thunderstruck with
one long and heavy thought. Then at last he turned abruptly to
his second in the silk hat and said: "Who are you?" The man in the silk hat blinked and bridled in affected surprise,
like one who was in truth accustomed to be doubted. "I am King Edward VII," he said, with shaky arrogance. "Do you
doubt my word?" "I do not doubt it in the least," answered MacIan. "Then, why," said the large man in the silk hat, trembling from
head to foot, "why do you wear your hat before the king?" "Why should I take it off," retorted MacIan, with equal heat,
"before a usurper?" Turnbull swung round on his heel. "Well, really," he said, "I
thought at least you were a loyal subject." "I am the only loyal subject," answered the Gael. "For nearly
thirty years I have walked these islands and have not found
another." "You are always hard to follow," remarked Turnbull, genially,
"and sometimes so much so as to be hardly worth following." "I alone am loyal," insisted MacIan; "for I alone am in
rebellion. I am ready at any instant to restore the Stuarts. I
am ready at any instant to defy the Hanoverian brood--and I defy
it now even when face to face with the actual ruler of the
enormous British Empire!" And folding his arms and throwing back his lean, hawklike face,
he haughtily confronted the man with the formal frock-coat and
the eccentric elbow. "What right had you stunted German squires," he cried, "to
interfere in a quarrel between Scotch and English and Irish
gentlemen? Who made you, whose fathers could not splutter English
while they walked in Whitehall, who made you the judge between
the republic of Sidney and the monarchy of Montrose? What had
your sires to do with England that they should have the foul
offering of the blood of Derwentwater and the heart of Jimmy
Dawson? Where are the corpses of Culloden? Where is the blood of
Lochiel?" MacIan advanced upon his opponent with a bony and
pointed finger, as if indicating the exact pocket in which the
blood of that Cameron was probably kept; and Edward VII fell back
a few paces in considerable confusion. "What good have you ever done to us?" he continued in harsher and
harsher accents, forcing the other back towards the flower-beds. "What good have you ever done, you race of German sausages? Yards
of barbarian etiquette, to throttle the freedom of aristocracy! Gas of northern metaphysics to blow up Broad Church bishops like
balloons. Bad pictures and bad manners and pantheism and the
Albert Memorial. Go back to Hanover, you humbug? Go to----"

Before the end of this tirade the arrogance of the monarch had
entirely given way; he had fairly turned tail and was trundling
away down the path. MacIan strode after him still preaching and
flourishing his large, lean hands. The other two remained in the
centre of the lawn--Turnbull in convulsions of laughter, the
lunatic in convulsions of disgust. Almost at the same moment a
third figure came stepping swiftly across the lawn. The advancing figure walked with a stoop, and yet somehow flung
his forked and narrow beard forward. That carefully cut and
pointed yellow beard was, indeed, the most emphatic thing about
him. When he clasped his hands behind him, under the tails of his
coat, he would wag his beard at a man like a big forefinger. It
performed almost all his gestures; it was more important than the
glittering eye-glasses through which he looked or the beautiful
bleating voice in which he spoke. His face and neck were of a
lusty red, but lean and stringy; he always wore his expensive
gold-rim eye-glasses slightly askew upon his aquiline nose; and
he always showed two gleaming foreteeth under his moustache, in a
smile so perpetual as to earn the reputation of a sneer. But for
the crooked glasses his dress was always exquisite; and but for
the smile he was perfectly and perennially depressed. "Don't you think," said the new-comer, with a sort of
supercilious entreaty, "that we had better all come into
breakfast? It is such a mistake to wait for breakfast. It spoils
one's temper so much." "Quite so," replied Turnbull, seriously. "There seems almost to have been a little quarrelling here," said
the man with the goatish beard. "It is rather a long story," said Turnbull, smiling. "Originally,
it might be called a phase in the quarrel between science and
religion." The new-comer started slightly, and Turnbull replied to the
question on his face. "Oh, yes," he said, "I am science!" "I congratulate you heartily," answered the other, "I am Doctor
Quayle." Turnbull's eyes did not move, but he realized that the man in the
panama hat had lost all his ease of a landed proprietor and had
withdrawn to a distance of thirty yards, where he stood glaring
with all the contraction of fear and hatred that can stiffen a
cat. *                    *                   *

MacIan was sitting somewhat disconsolately on a stump of tree,
his large black head half buried in his large brown hands, when
Turnbull strode up to him chewing a cigarette.