2. O Noble Caesar! 3. O wofull day! 4. O Traitors, Villaines! 1. O most bloody sight! 2. We will be reueng'd: Reuenge
About, seeke, burne, fire, kill, slay,
Let not a Traitor liue

   Ant. Stay Country-men

   1. Peace there, heare the Noble Antony

   2. Wee'l heare him, wee'l follow him, wee'l dy with
him

   Ant. Good Friends, sweet Friends, let me not stirre you vp
To such a sodaine Flood of Mutiny:
They that haue done this Deede, are honourable. What priuate greefes they haue, alas I know not,
That made them do it: They are Wise, and Honourable,
And will no doubt with Reasons answer you. I come not (Friends) to steale away your hearts,
I am no Orator, as Brutus is:
But (as you know me all) a plaine blunt man
That loue my Friend, and that they know full well,
That gaue me publike leaue to speake of him:
For I haue neyther writ nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor Vtterance, nor the power of Speech,
To stirre mens Blood. I onely speake right on:
I tell you that, which you your selues do know,
Shew you sweet Caesars wounds, poor poor dum mouths
And bid them speake for me: But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle vp your Spirits, and put a Tongue
In euery Wound of Caesar, that should moue
The stones of Rome, to rise and Mutiny

   All. Wee'l Mutiny

   1 Wee'l burne the house of Brutus

   3 Away then, come, seeke the Conspirators

   Ant. Yet heare me Countrymen, yet heare me speake
  All. Peace hoe, heare Antony, most Noble Antony

   Ant. Why Friends, you go to do you know not what:
Wherein hath Caesar thus deseru'd your loues? Alas you know not, I must tell you then:
You haue forgot the Will I told you of

   All. Most true, the Will, let's stay and heare the Wil

   Ant. Heere is the Will, and vnder Caesars Seale:
To euery Roman Citizen he giues,
To euery seuerall man, seuenty fiue Drachmaes

   2 Ple. Most Noble Caesar, wee'l reuenge his death

   3 Ple. O Royall Caesar

   Ant. Heare me with patience

   All. Peace hoe
  Ant. Moreouer, he hath left you all his Walkes,
His priuate Arbors, and new-planted Orchards,
On this side Tyber, he hath left them you,
And to your heyres for euer: common pleasures
To walke abroad, and recreate your selues. Heere was a Caesar: when comes such another? 1.Ple. Neuer, neuer: come, away, away:
Wee'l burne his body in the holy place,
And with the Brands fire the Traitors houses. Take vp the body

   2.Ple. Go fetch fire

   3.Ple. Plucke downe Benches

   4.Ple. Plucke downe Formes, Windowes, any thing. Exit Plebeians. Ant. Now let it worke: Mischeefe thou art a-foot,
Take thou what course thou wilt. How now Fellow? Enter Seruant. Ser. Sir, Octauius is already come to Rome

   Ant. Where is hee? Ser. He and Lepidus are at Caesars house

   Ant. And thither will I straight, to visit him:
He comes vpon a wish. Fortune is merry,
And in this mood will giue vs any thing

   Ser. I heard him say, Brutus and Cassius
Are rid like Madmen through the Gates of Rome

   Ant. Belike they had some notice of the people
How I had moued them. Bring me to Octauius. Exeunt. Enter Cinna the Poet, and after him the Plebeians. Cinna. I dreamt to night, that I did feast with Caesar,
And things vnluckily charge my Fantasie:
I haue no will to wander foorth of doores,
Yet something leads me foorth

   1. What is your name? 2. Whether are you going? 3. Where do you dwell? 4. Are you a married man, or a Batchellor? 2. Answer euery man directly

   1. I, and breefely

   4. I, and wisely

   3. I, and truly, you were best

   Cin. What is my name? Whether am I going? Where
do I dwell? Am I a married man, or a Batchellour? Then
to answer euery man, directly and breefely, wisely and
truly: wisely I say, I am a Batchellor

   2 That's as much as to say, they are fooles that marrie:
you'l beare me a bang for that I feare: proceede directly

   Cinna. Directly I am going to Caesars Funerall

   1. As a Friend, or an Enemy? Cinna. As a friend

   2. That matter is answered directly

   4. For your dwelling: breefely

   Cinna. Breefely, I dwell by the Capitoll

   3. Your name sir, truly

   Cinna. Truly, my name is Cinna

   1. Teare him to peeces, hee's a Conspirator

   Cinna. I am Cinna the Poet, I am Cinna the Poet

   4. Teare him for his bad verses, teare him for his bad
Verses

   Cin. I am not Cinna the Conspirator

   4. It is no matter, his name's Cinna, plucke but his
name out of his heart, and turne him going

   3. Teare him, tear him; Come Brands hoe, Firebrands:
to Brutus, to Cassius, burne all. Some to Decius House,
and some to Caska's; some to Ligarius: Away, go. Exeunt. all the Plebeians. Actus Quartus. Enter Antony, Octauius, and Lepidus. Ant. These many then shall die, their names are prickt
  Octa. Your Brother too must dye: consent you Lepidus? Lep. I do consent

   Octa. Pricke him downe Antony

   Lep. Vpon condition Publius shall not liue,
Who is your Sisters sonne, Marke Antony

   Ant. He shall not liue; looke, with a spot I dam him.