"Our principal has wounded the Marquis four times
at least, and he is none the worse ." The Marquis put up his hand with a curious air of ghastly
patience. "Please let me speak," he said. "It is rather important. Mr.
Syme," he continued, turning to his opponent, "we are fighting
today, if I remember right, because you expressed a wish (which
I thought irrational) to pull my nose. Would you oblige me by
pulling my nose now as quickly as possible? I have to catch a
train." "I protest that this is most irregular," said Dr. Bull
indignantly. "It is certainly somewhat opposed to precedent," said Colonel
Ducroix, looking wistfully at his principal. "There is, I think,
one case on record (Captain Bellegarde and the Baron Zumpt) in
which the weapons were changed in the middle of the encounter at
the request of one of the combatants. But one can hardly call
one's nose a weapon." "Will you or will you not pull my nose?" said the Marquis in
exasperation. "Come, come, Mr. Syme! You wanted to do it, do it! You can have no conception of how important it is to me. Don't be
so selfish! Pull my nose at once, when I ask you!" and he bent
slightly forward with a fascinating smile. The Paris train,
panting and groaning, had grated into a little station behind the
neighbouring hill. Syme had the feeling he had more than once had in these adventures
--the sense that a horrible and sublime wave lifted to heaven was
just toppling over. Walking in a world he half understood, he took
two paces forward and seized the Roman nose of this remarkable
nobleman. He pulled it hard, and it came off in his hand. He stood for some seconds with a foolish solemnity, with the
pasteboard proboscis still between his fingers, looking at it,
while the sun and the clouds and the wooded hills looked down
upon this imbecile scene. The Marquis broke the silence in a loud and cheerful voice. "If anyone has any use for my left eyebrow," he said, "he can have
it. Colonel Ducroix, do accept my left eyebrow! It's the kind of
thing that might come in useful any day," and he gravely tore off
one of his swarthy Assyrian brows, bringing about half his brown
forehead with it, and politely offered it to the Colonel, who
stood crimson and speechless with rage. "If I had known," he spluttered, "that I was acting for a poltroon
who pads himself to fight--"

"Oh, I know, I know!" said the Marquis, recklessly throwing various
parts of himself right and left about the field. "You are making a
mistake; but it can't be explained just now. I tell you the train
has come into the station!" "Yes," said Dr. Bull fiercely, "and the train shall go out of the
station. It shall go out without you. We know well enough for what
devil's work--"

The mysterious Marquis lifted his hands with a desperate gesture. He was a strange scarecrow standing there in the sun with half his
old face peeled off, and half another face glaring and grinning
from underneath. "Will you drive me mad?" he cried. "The train--"

"You shall not go by the train," said Syme firmly, and grasped his
sword. The wild figure turned towards Syme, and seemed to be gathering
itself for a sublime effort before speaking. "You great fat, blasted, blear-eyed, blundering, thundering,
brainless, Godforsaken, doddering, damned fool!" he said without
taking breath. "You great silly, pink-faced, towheaded turnip! You--"

"You shall not go by this train," repeated Syme. "And why the infernal blazes," roared the other, "should I want to
go by the train?" "We know all," said the Professor sternly. "You are going to Paris
to throw a bomb!" "Going to Jericho to throw a Jabberwock!" cried the other, tearing
his hair, which came off easily. "Have you all got softening of the brain, that you don't realise
what I am? Did you really think I wanted to catch that train? Twenty Paris trains might go by for me. Damn Paris trains!" "Then what did you care about?" began the Professor. "What did I care about? I didn't care about catching the train; I
cared about whether the train caught me, and now, by God! it has
caught me." "I regret to inform you," said Syme with restraint, "that your
remarks convey no impression to my mind. Perhaps if you were to
remove the remains of your original forehead and some portion of
what was once your chin, your meaning would become clearer. Mental
lucidity fulfils itself in many ways. What do you mean by saying
that the train has caught you? It may be my literary fancy, but
somehow I feel that it ought to mean something." "It means everything," said the other, "and the end of everything. Sunday has us now in the hollow of his hand." "Us!" repeated the Professor, as if stupefied. "What do you mean by
'us'?" "The police, of course!" said the Marquis, and tore off his scalp
and half his face. The head which emerged was the blonde, well brushed, smooth-haired
head which is common in the English constabulary, but the face was
terribly pale. "I am Inspector Ratcliffe," he said, with a sort of haste that
verged on harshness. "My name is pretty well known to the police,
and I can see well enough that you belong to them. But if there is
any doubt about my position, I have a card" and he began to pull a
blue card from his pocket. The Professor gave a tired gesture. "Oh, don't show it us," he said wearily; "we've got enough of them
to equip a paper-chase." The little man named Bull, had, like many men who seem to be of a
mere vivacious vulgarity, sudden movements of good taste. Here he
certainly saved the situation. In the midst of this staggering
transformation scene he stepped forward with all the gravity and
responsibility of a second, and addressed the two seconds of the
Marquis. "Gentlemen," he said, "we all owe you a serious apology; but I
assure you that you have not been made the victims of such a low
joke as you imagine, or indeed of anything undignified in a man of
honour. You have not wasted your time; you have helped to save the
world. We are not buffoons, but very desperate men at war with a
vast conspiracy. A secret society of anarchists is hunting us like
hares; not such unfortunate madmen as may here or there throw a
bomb through starvation or German philosophy, but a rich and
powerful and fanatical church, a church of eastern pessimism, which
holds it holy to destroy mankind like vermin. How hard they hunt us
you can gather from the fact that we are driven to such disguises
as those for which I apologise, and to such pranks as this one by
which you suffer. " The younger second of the Marquis, a short man with a black
moustache, bowed politely, and said--

"Of course, I accept the apology; but you will in your turn forgive
me if I decline to follow you further into your difficulties, and
permit myself to say good morning! The sight of an acquaintance and
distinguished fellow-townsman coming to pieces in the open air is
unusual, and, upon the whole, sufficient for one day. Colonel
Ducroix, I would in no way influence your actions, but if you feel
with me that our present society is a little abnormal, I am now
going to walk back to the town." Colonel Ducroix moved mechanically, but then tugged abruptly at his
white moustache and broke out--

"No, by George! I won't. If these gentlemen are really in a mess
with a lot of low wreckers like that, I'll see them through it. I
have fought for France, and it is hard if I can't fight for
civilization." Dr. Bull took off his hat and waved it, cheering as at a public
meeting. "Don't make too much noise," said Inspector Ratcliffe, "Sunday may
hear you." "Sunday!" cried Bull, and dropped his hat. "Yes," retorted Ratcliffe, "he may be with them." "With whom?" asked Syme. "With the people out of that train," said the other. "What you say seems utterly wild," began Syme.