"But you know we must not go into the lane," said
Loveit, hesitatingly. "Pugh!" said Tarlton, "why, now, what harm could
it do?" "I don't know," said Loveit, drumming upon his battledore; "but--"

"You don't know, man! why, then, what are you afraid of, I ask you?" Loveit coloured, went on drumming, and again, in a lower voice, said "HE
DIDN'T KNOW." But upon Tarlton's repeating, in a more insolent tone, "I
ask you, man, what you're afraid of?" he suddenly left off drumming, and
looking round, said, "he was not afraid of anything that he knew of." "Yes, but you are," said Hardy, coming forward. "Am I?" said Loveit; "of what, pray, am I afraid?" "Of doing wrong!" "Afraid OF DOING WRONG!" repeated Tarlton, mimicking him, so that he made
everybody laugh. "Now, hadn't you better say afraid of being flogged?" "No," said Hardy, coolly, after the laugh had somewhat subsided, "I am as
little afraid of being flogged as you are, Tarlton; but I meant--"

"No matter what you meant; why should you interfere with your wisdom and
your meanings; nobody thought of asking YOU to stir a step for us; but we
asked Loveit, because he's the best fellow in the world." "And for that very reason you should not ask him, because, you know he
can't refuse you anything." "Indeed, though," cried Loveit, piqued, "THERE you're mistaken, for I
could refuse if I chose it." Hardy smiled; and Loveit, half afraid of his contempt, and half afraid of
Tarlton's ridicule, stood doubtful, and again had recourse to his
battledore, which he balanced most curiously upon his forefinger. "Look
at him!--now do look at him!" cried Tarlton; "did you ever in your life
see anybody look so silly?--Hardy has him quite under his thumb; he's so
mortally afraid of Parson Prig, that he dare not, for the soul of him,
turn either of his eyes from the tip of his nose; look how he squints!" "I don't squint," said Loveit, looking up, "and nobody has me under his
thumb! and what Hardy said was only for fear I should get in disgrace;
he's the best friend I have." Loveit spoke this with more than usual spirit, for both his heart and his
pride were touched. "Come along, then," said Hardy, taking him by the arm in an affectionate
manner; and he was just going, when Tarlton called after him, "Ay, go
along with its best friend, and take care it does not get into a scrape;-
-good-bye, Little Panado!" "Whom do they call Little Panado?" said Loveit, turning his head hastily
back. "Never mind," said Hardy, "what does it signify?" "No," said Loveit, "to be sure it does not signify; but one does not like
to be called Little Panado:  besides," added he, after going a few steps
farther, "they'll all think it so ill-natured. I had better go back, and
just tell them that I'm very sorry I can't get their shuttlecock; do come
back with me." "No," said Hardy, "I can't go back; and you'd better not." "But, I assure you, I won't stay a minute; wait for me," added Loveit;
and he slunk back again to prove that he was not Little Panado. Once returned, the rest followed, of course; for to support his character
of good-nature he was obliged to yield to the entreaties of his
companions, and to show his spirit, leapt over the gate, amidst the
acclamations of the little mob:--he was quickly out of sight. "Here," cried he, returning in about five minutes, quite out of breath,
"I've got the shuttlecock; and I'll tell you what I've seen," cried he,
panting for breath. "What?" cried everybody, eagerly. "Why, just at the turn of the corner, at the end of the lane"--panting. "Well," said Tarlton, impatiently, "do go on." "Let me just take breath first." "Pugh--never mind your breath." "Well, then, just at the turn of the corner, at the end of the lane, as I
was looking about for the shuttlecock, I heard a great rustling somewhere
near me, and so I looked where it could come from; and I saw, in a nice
little garden, on the opposite side of the way, a boy, about as big as
Tarlton, sitting in a great tree, shaking the branches:  so I called to
the boy, to beg one; but he said he could not give me one, for that they
were his grandfather's; and just at that minute, from behind a gooseberry
bush, up popped the uncle; the grandfather poked his head out of the
window; so I ran off as fast as my legs would carry me though I heard him
bawling after me all the way." "And let him bawl," cried Tarlton; "he shan't bawl for nothing; I'm
determined we'll have some of his fine large rosy apples before I sleep
to-night." At this speech a general silence ensued; everybody kept their eyes fixed
upon Tarlton, except Loveit, who looked down, apprehensive that he should
be drawn on much farther than he intended. "Oh, indeed!" said he to
himself, "as Hardy told me, I had better not have come back!" Regardless of this confusion, Tarlton continued, "But before I say any
more, I hope we have no spies amongst us. If there is any one of you
afraid to be flogged, let him march off this instant!" Loveit coloured, bit his lips, wished to go, but had not the courage to
move first. He waited to see what everybody else would do:  nobody
stirred; so Loveit stood still. "Well, then," cried Tarlton, giving his hand to the boy next him, then to
the next, "your word and honour that you won't betray me; but stand by
me, and I'll stand by you." Each boy gave his hand and his promise;
repeating, "Stand by me, and I'll stand by you." Loveit hung back till the last; and had almost twisted off the button of
the boy's coat who screened him, when Tarlton came up, holding out his
hand, "Come, Loveit, lad, you're in for it:  stand by me, and I'll stand
by you." "Indeed, Tarlton," expostulated he, without looking him in the face, "I
do wish you'd give up this scheme; I daresay all the apples are gone by
this time; I wish you would. Do, pray, give up this scheme." "What scheme, man? you have'n't heard it yet; you may as well know your
text before you begin preaching." The corners of Loveit's mouth could not refuse to smile, though in his
heart he felt not the slightest inclination to laugh. "Why, I don't know you, I declare I don't know you to-day," said Tarlton;
"you used to be the best natured most agreeable lad in the world, and
would do anything one asked you; but you're quite altered of late, as we
were saying just now, when you skulked away with Hardy:  come,--do, man,
pluck up a little spirit, and be one of us, or you'll make us all HATE
YOU." "HATE me!" repeated Loveit, with terror; "no, surely, you won't all HATE
me!" and he mechanically stretched out his hand which Tarlton shook
violently, saying, "Ay, now, that's right." "Ay, now, that's wrong!" whispered Loveit's conscience; but his
conscience was of no use to him, for it was always overpowered by the
voice of numbers; and though he had the wish, he never had the power, to
do right. "Poor Loveit! I knew he would not refuse us," cried his
companions; and even Tarlton, the moment he shook hands with him,
despised him. It is certain that weakness of mind is despised both by
the good and the bad. The league being thus formed, Tarlton assumed all the airs of commander,
explained his schemes, and laid the plan of attack upon the poor old
man's apple-tree. It was the only one he had the world. We shall not
dwell upon their consultation; for the amusement of contriving such
expeditions is often the chief thing which induces idle boys to engage in
them. There was a small window at the end of the back staircase, through which,
between nine and ten o'clock at night, Tarlton, accompanied by Loveit and
another boy, crept out. It was a moonlight night, and after crossing the
field, and climbing the gate, directed by Loveit, who now resolved to go
through the affair with spirit, they proceeded down the lane with rash
yet fearful steps. At a distance Loveit saw the white washed cottage, and the apple-tree
beside it. They quickened their pace, and with some difficulty scrambled
through the hedge which fenced the garden, though not without being
scratched and torn by the briers. Everything was silent. Yet now and
then, at every rustling of the leaves, they started, and their hearts
beat violently. Once, as Loveit was climbing the apple-tree, he thought
he heard a door in the cottage open, and earnestly begged his companions
to desist and return home. This, however, he could by no means persuade
them to do, until they had filled their pockets with apples; then, to his
great joy, they returned, crept in at the window and each retired, as
softly as possible, to his own apartment. Loveit slept in the room with Hardy, whom he had left fast asleep, and
whom he now was extremely afraid of awakening. All the apples were
emptied out of Loveit's pockets, and lodged with Tarlton till the
morning, for fear the smell should betray the secret to Hardy. The room
door was apt to creak, but it was opened with such precaution, that no
noise could be heard, and Loveit found his friend as fast asleep as when
he left him. "Ah," said he to himself, "how quietly he sleeps! I wish I had been
sleeping too." The reproaches of Loveit's conscience, however, served no
other purpose but to torment him; he had not sufficient strength of mind
to be good. The very next night, in spite of all his fears, and all his
penitence, and all his resolutions, by a little fresh ridicule and
persuasion he was induced to accompany the same party on a similar
expedition. We must observe, that the necessity for continuing their
depredations became stronger the third day; for, though at first only a
small party had been in the secret, by degrees it was divulged to the
whole school; and it was necessary to secure secrecy by sharing the
booty. Everyone was astonished that Hardy, with all his quickness and
penetration, had not yet discovered their proceedings; but Loveit could
not help suspecting that he was not quite so ignorant as he appeared to
be. Loveit had strictly kept his promise of secrecy; but he was by no
means an artful boy; and in talking to his friend, conscious that he had
something to conceal, he was perpetually on the point of betraying
himself; then recollecting his engagement, he blushed, stammered,
bungled; and upon Hardy's asking what he meant, would answer with a
silly, guilty countenance, that he did not know; or abruptly break off,
saying, "Oh nothing! nothing at all!" It was in vain that he urged Tarlton to permit him to consult his friend. A gloom overspread Tarlton's brow when he began to speak on the subject,
and he always returned a peremptory refusal, accompanied with some such
taunting expression as this--"I wish we had nothing to do with such a
sneaking fellow; he'll betray us all, I see, before we have done with
him." "Well," said Loveit to himself, "so I am abused after all, and called a
sneaking fellow for my pains; that's rather hard, to be sure, when I've
got so little by the job." In truth he had not got much; for in the division of the booty only one
apple, and half of another, which was only half ripe, happened to fall to
his share; though, to be sure, when they had all eaten their apples, he
had the satisfaction to hear everybody declare they were very sorry they
had forgotten to offer some of theirs to "POOR LOVEIT." In the meantime, the visits to the apple-tree had been now too frequently
repeated to remain concealed from the old man who lived in the cottage. He used to examine his only tree very frequently, and missing numbers of
rosy apples, which he had watched ripening, he, though not prone to
suspicion, began to think that there was something going wrong;
especially as a gap was made in his hedge, and there were several small
footsteps in his flower beds. The good old man was not at all inclined to give pain to any living
creature, much less to children, of whom he was particularly fond. Nor
was he in the least avaricious, for though he was not rich, he had enough
to live upon, because he had been very industrious in his youth; and he
was always very ready to part with the little he had. Nor was he a cross
old man. If anything would have made him angry, it would have been the
seeing his favourite tree robbed, as he had promised himself the pleasure
of giving his red apples to his grandchildren on his birthday. However,
he looked up at the tree in sorrow rather than in anger, and leaning upon
his staff, he began to consider what he had best do. "If I complain to their master," said he to himself, "they will certainly
be flogged, and that I should be sorry for:  yet they must not be let to
go on stealing; that would be worse still, for it would surely bring them
to the gallows in the end.