none such
ever slept at the "Saracen's Head" afore, or shall afterwards, as long as
my name's Bustle, and the "Saracen's Head" is the "Saracen's Head." Just. Again! again! Mrs. Landlady, this is downright--I have said you
should speak presently. He SHALL speak first, since I've said it--that's
poz! Speak on, friend. You slept last night at the "Saracen's Head." Old M.  Yes, please your worship, and I accuse nobody; but at night I had
my little money safe, and in the morning it was gone. Land. Gone!--gone, indeed, in my house! and this is the way I'm to be
treated! Is it so? I couldn't but speak, your worship, to such an
inhuman like, out o' the way, scandalous charge, if King George and all
the Royal Family were sitting in your worship's chair, beside you, to
silence me (turning to the Old Man). And this is your gratitude,
forsooth! Didn't you tell me that any hole in my house was good enough
for you, wheedling hypocrite? And the thanks I receive is to call me and
mine a pack of thieves. Old M.  Oh, no, no, no, NO--a pack of thieves, by no means. Land. Ay, I thought when _I_ came to speak we should have you upon your
marrow-bones in--

Just. (imperiously). Silence! Five times have I commanded silence, and
five times in vain; and I won't command anything five times in vain--
THAT'S POZ! Land. (in a pet, aside). Old Poz! (aloud). Then, your worship, I don't
see any business I have to be waiting here; the folks want me at home
(returning and whispering). Shall I send the goose-pie up, your worship,
if it's ready? Just. (with magnanimity). I care not for the goose-pie, Mrs. Bustle. Do not talk to me of goose-pies; this is no place to talk of pies. Land. Oh, for that matter, your worship knows best, to be sure. (Exit Landlady, angry.) SCENE III. JUSTICE HEADSTRONG, OLD MAN and LUCY. Lucy. Ah, now, I'm glad he can speak; now tell papa; and you need not be
afraid to speak to him, for he is very good-natured. Don't contradict
him, though, because he told ME not. Just. Oh, darling, YOU shall contradict me as often as you please--only
not before I've drunk my chocolate, child--hey! Go on, my good friend;
you see what it is to live in Old England, where, thank Heaven, the
poorest of His Majesty's subjects may have justice, and speak his mind
before the first in the land. Now speak on; and you hear she tells you
that you need not be afraid of me. Speak on. Old M.  I thank your worship, I'm sure. Just. Thank me! for what, sir? I won't be thanked for doing justice,
sir; so--but explain this matter. You lost your money, hey, at the
"Saracen's Head"? You had it safe last night, hey?--and you missed it
this morning? Are you sure you had it safe at night? Old M.  Oh, please your worship, quite sure; for I took it out and looked
at it just before I said my prayers. Just. You did--did ye so?--hum! Pray, my good friend, where might you
put your money when you went to bed? Old M.  Please, your worship, where I always put it--always--in my
tobacco-box. Just. Your tobacco-box! I never heard of such a thing--to make a STRONG
BOX of a tobacco-box. Ha! ha! ha! hum!--and you say the box and all were
gone in the morning? Old M.  No, please your worship, no; not the box--the box was never
stirred from the place where I put it. They left me the box. Just. Tut, tut, tut, man!--took the money and left the box? I'll never
believe THAT! I'll never believe that anyone could be such a fool. Tut,
tut! the thing's impossible! It's well you are not upon oath. Old M.  If I were, please your worship, I should say the same; for it is
the truth. Just. Don't tell me, don't tell me; I say the thing is impossible. Old M.  Please, your worship, here's the box. Just. (goes on without looking at it). Nonsense! nonsense! it's no such
thing; it's no such thing, I say--no man would take the money and leave
the tobacco-box. I won't believe it. Nothing shall make me believe it
ever--that's poz. Lucy (takes the box, and holds it up before her father's eyes). You did
not see the box, did you, papa! Just. Yes, yes, yes, child--nonsense! it's all a lie from beginning to
end. A man who tells one lie will tell a hundred. All a lie! all a lie! Old M.  If your worship would give me leave--

Just. Sir, it does not signify--it does not signify! I've said it, I've
said it, and that's enough to convince me, and I'll tell you more; if my
Lord Chief Justice of England told it to me, I would not believe it--
that's poz! Lucy (still playing with the box). But how comes the box here, I wonder? Just.