So, my lord, to put an
end to whatever of the kind you may have felt against poor Talbot, I'll
assure you he's as innocent o' that unfortunate song as the babe unborn. Lord J. It is rather late for Mr. Talbot to make apologies to me. Rory. He make apologies! Not he, 'faith; he'd send me to Coventry, or,
maybe, to a worse place, did he but know I was condescending to make this
bit of explanation, unknown to him. But, upon my conscience, I've a
regard for you both, and don't like to see you go together by the ears. Now, look you, my lord. By this book, and all the books that were ever
shut and opened, he never saw or heard of that unlucky song of mine till
I came out with it this morning. Lord J. But you told me this morning that it was he who wrote it. Rory. For that I take shame to myself, as it turned out; but it was only
a WHITE lie to SARVE a friend, and make him cut a dash with a new song at
election time. But I've done for ever with white lies. Lord J. (walking about as if agitated). I wish you had never begun with
them, Mr. O'Ryan. This may be a good joke to you; but it is none to me
or Talbot. So Talbot never wrote a word of the song? Rory. Not a word or syllable, good or bad. Lord J. And I have given my promise to vote against him. He'll lose his
election. Rory. Not if you'll give me leave to speak to your friends in your name. Lord J.  I have promised to leave them to themselves; and Wheeler, I am
sure, has engaged them by this time. Rory. Bless my body! I'll not stay prating here then. (Exit Rory.) Lord J. (follows). But what can have become of Talbot? I have been too
hasty for once in my life. Well, I shall suffer for it more than anybody
else; for I love Talbot, since he did not make the song, of which I hate
to think. (Exit.) SCENE III. A large hall in Eton College--A staircase at the end--Eton lads, dressed
in their Montem Dresses in the Scene--In front, WHEELER (dressed as
Captain), BURSAL and FINSBURY. Fins. I give you infinite credit, Mr. Wheeler, for this dress. Burs. INFINITE CREDIT! Why, he'll have no objection to that--hey,
Wheeler? But I thought Finsbury knew you too well to give you credit for
anything. Fins. You are pleased to be pleasant, sir. Mr. Wheeler knows, in that
sense of the word, it is out of my power to give him credit, and I'm sure
he would not ask it. Wheel. (aside). O, Bursal, pay him, and I'll pay you tomorrow. Burs. Now, if you weren't to be captain after all, Wheeler, what a
pretty figure you'd cut. Ha! ha! ha!--Hey? Wheel. Oh, I am as sure of being captain as of being alive. (Aside.) Do
pay for me, now, there's a good, dear fellow, before THEY (looking back)
come up. Burs. (aside). I love to make him lick the dust. (Aloud.) Hollo! here's Finsbury waiting to be paid, lads. (To the lads who are in the
back scene.) Who has paid, and who has not paid, I say? (The lads come forward, and several exclaim at once,) I've paid! I've
paid! Enter LORD JOHN and RORY O'RYAN. Rory. Oh, King of Fashion, how fine we are! Why, now, to look at ye all
one might fancy one's self at the playhouse at once, or at a fancy ball
in dear little Dublin. Come, strike up a dance. Burs. Pshaw! Wherever you come, Rory O'Ryan, no one else can be heard. Who has paid, and who has not paid, I say? Several Boys exclaim. We've all paid. 1st Boy. I've not paid, but here's my money. Several Boys. We have not paid, but here's our money. 6th Boy. Order there, I am marshal. All that have paid march off to the
staircase, and take your seats there, one by one. March! (As they march by, one by one, so as to display their dresses, Mr.
Finsbury bows, and says,)

A thousand thanks, gentlemen. Thank you, gentlemen. Thanks, gentlemen. The finest sight ever I saw out of Lon'on. Rory, as each lad passes, catches his arm, Are you a TalbotITE or a
WheelerITE? To each who answers "A Wheelerite," Rory replies, "Phoo! dance off, then. Go to the devil and shake yourself. "*   Each who
answers "A Talbotite," Rory shakes by the hand violently, singing,

     "Talbot, oh, Talbot's the dog for Rory." *This is the name of a country dance. When they have almost all passed, Lord John says, But where can Mr.
Talbot be all this time?