Enter Banquo, and Fleance, with a Torch before him. Banq. How goes the Night, Boy? Fleance. The Moone is downe: I haue not heard the
Clock

   Banq. And she goes downe at Twelue

   Fleance. I take't, 'tis later, Sir

   Banq. Hold, take my Sword:
There's Husbandry in Heauen,
Their Candles are all out: take thee that too. A heauie Summons lyes like Lead vpon me,
And yet I would not sleepe:
Mercifull Powers, restraine in me the cursed thoughts
That Nature giues way to in repose. Enter Macbeth, and a Seruant with a Torch. Giue me my Sword: who's there? Macb. A Friend

   Banq. What Sir, not yet at rest? the King's a bed. He hath beene in vnusuall Pleasure,
And sent forth great Largesse to your Offices. This Diamond he greetes your Wife withall,
By the name of most kind Hostesse,
And shut vp in measurelesse content

   Mac. Being vnprepar'd,
Our will became the seruant to defect,
Which else should free haue wrought

   Banq. All's well. I dreamt last Night of the three weyward Sisters:
To you they haue shew'd some truth

   Macb. I thinke not of them:
Yet when we can entreat an houre to serue,
We would spend it in some words vpon that Businesse,
If you would graunt the time

   Banq. At your kind'st leysure

   Macb. If you shall cleaue to my consent,
When 'tis, it shall make Honor for you

   Banq. So I lose none,
In seeking to augment it, but still keepe
My Bosome franchis'd, and Allegeance cleare,
I shall be counsail'd

   Macb. Good repose the while

   Banq. Thankes Sir: the like to you. Exit Banquo. Macb. Goe bid thy Mistresse, when my drinke is ready,
She strike vpon the Bell. Get thee to bed. Enter. Is this a Dagger, which I see before me,
The Handle toward my Hand? Come, let me clutch thee:
I haue thee not, and yet I see thee still. Art thou not fatall Vision, sensible
To feeling, as to sight? or art thou but
A Dagger of the Minde, a false Creation,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed Braine? I see thee yet, in forme as palpable,
As this which now I draw. Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going,
And such an Instrument I was to vse. Mine Eyes are made the fooles o'th' other Sences,
Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still;
And on thy Blade, and Dudgeon, Gouts of Blood,
Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
It is the bloody Businesse, which informes
Thus to mine Eyes. Now o're the one halfe World
Nature seemes dead, and wicked Dreames abuse
The Curtain'd sleepe: Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Heccats Offrings: and wither'd Murther,
Alarum'd by his Centinell, the Wolfe,
Whose howle's his Watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquins rauishing sides, towards his designe
Moues like a Ghost. Thou sowre and firme-set Earth
Heare not my steps, which they may walke, for feare
Thy very stones prate of my where-about,
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now sutes with it. Whiles I threat, he liues:
Words to the heat of deedes too cold breath giues. A Bell rings. I goe, and it is done: the Bell inuites me. Heare it not, Duncan, for it is a Knell,
That summons thee to Heauen, or to Hell. Enter. Scena Secunda. Enter Lady. La. That which hath made the[m] drunk, hath made me bold:
What hath quench'd them, hath giuen me fire. Hearke, peace: it was the Owle that shriek'd,
The fatall Bell-man, which giues the stern'st good-night. He is about it, the Doores are open:
And the surfeted Groomes doe mock their charge
With Snores. I haue drugg'd their Possets,
That Death and Nature doe contend about them,
Whether they liue, or dye. Enter Macbeth. Macb. Who's there? what hoa? Lady. Alack, I am afraid they haue awak'd,
And 'tis not done: th' attempt, and not the deed,
Confounds vs: hearke: I lay'd their Daggers ready,
He could not misse 'em. Had he not resembled
My Father as he slept, I had don't. My Husband? Macb. I haue done the deed:
Didst thou not heare a noyse? Lady. I heard the Owle schreame, and the Crickets cry. Did not you speake? Macb. When? Lady. Now

   Macb. As I descended? Lady. I

   Macb. Hearke, who lyes i'th' second Chamber? Lady. Donalbaine

   Mac. This is a sorry sight

   Lady. A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight

   Macb. There's one did laugh in's sleepe,
And one cry'd Murther, that they did wake each other:
I stood, and heard them: But they did say their Prayers,
And addrest them againe to sleepe

   Lady. There are two lodg'd together

   Macb. One cry'd God blesse vs, and Amen the other,
As they had seene me with these Hangmans hands:
Listning their feare, I could not say Amen,
When they did say God blesse vs

   Lady. Consider it not so deepely

   Mac. But wherefore could not I pronounce Amen? I had most need of Blessing, and Amen stuck in my throat

   Lady. These deeds must not be thought
After these wayes: so, it will make vs mad

   Macb. Me thought I heard a voyce cry, Sleep no more:
Macbeth does murther Sleepe, the innocent Sleepe,
Sleepe that knits vp the rauel'd Sleeue of Care,
The death of each dayes Life, sore Labors Bath,
Balme of hurt Mindes, great Natures second Course,
Chiefe nourisher in Life's Feast

   Lady. What doe you meane? Macb. Still it cry'd, Sleepe no more to all the House:
Glamis hath murther'd Sleepe, and therefore Cawdor
Shall sleepe no more: Macbeth shall sleepe no more

   Lady. Who was it, that thus cry'd? why worthy Thane,
You doe vnbend your Noble strength, to thinke
So braine-sickly of things: Goe get some Water,
And wash this filthie Witnesse from your Hand. Why did you bring these Daggers from the place? They must lye there: goe carry them, and smeare
The sleepie Groomes with blood

   Macb. Ile goe no more:
I am afraid, to thinke what I haue done:
Looke on't againe, I dare not

   Lady. Infirme of purpose:
Giue me the Daggers: the sleeping, and the dead,
Are but as Pictures: 'tis the Eye of Childhood,
That feares a painted Deuill. If he doe bleed,
Ile guild the Faces of the Groomes withall,
For it must seeme their Guilt. Enter. Knocke within. Macb. Whence is that knocking?