For in that unendurable instant when he
hung, half slipping, to the ball of St. Paul's, the whole
universe had been destroyed and re-created. Suddenly through all the din of the dark streets came a crash of
glass. With that mysterious suddenness of the Cockney mob, a rush
was made in the right direction, a dingy office, next to the shop
of the potted meat. The pane of glass was lying in splinters
about the pavement. And the police already had their hands on a
very tall young man, with dark, lank hair and dark, dazed eyes,
with a grey plaid over his shoulder, who had just smashed the
shop window with a single blow of his stick. "I'd do it again," said the young man, with a furious white face. "Anybody would have done it. Did you see what it said? I swear
I'd do it again." Then his eyes encountered the monkish habit of
Michael, and he pulled off his grey tam-o'-shanter with the
gesture of a Catholic. "Father, did you see what they said?" he cried, trembling. "Did
you see what they dared to say? I didn't understand it at first. I read it half through before I broke the window." Michael felt he knew not how. The whole peace of the world was
pent up painfully in his heart. The new and childlike world which
he had seen so suddenly, men had not seen at all. Here they were
still at their old bewildering, pardonable, useless quarrels,
with so much to be said on both sides, and so little that need be
said at all. A fierce inspiration fell on him suddenly; he would
strike them where they stood with the love of God. They should
not move till they saw their own sweet and startling existence. They should not go from that place till they went home embracing
like brothers and shouting like men delivered. From the Cross
from which he had fallen fell the shadow of its fantastic mercy;
and the first three words he spoke in a voice like a silver
trumpet, held men as still as stones. Perhaps if he had spoken
there for an hour in his illumination he might have founded a
religion on Ludgate Hill. But the heavy hand of his guide fell
suddenly on his shoulder. "This poor fellow is dotty," he said good-humouredly to the
crowd. "I found him wandering in the Cathedral. Says he came in
a flying ship. Is there a constable to spare to take care of him?" There was a constable to spare. Two other constables attended to
the tall young man in grey; a fourth concerned himself with the
owner of the shop, who showed some tendency to be turbulent. They
took the tall young man away to a magistrate, whither we shall
follow him in an ensuing chapter. And they took the happiest man
in the world away to an asylum. II. THE RELIGION OF THE STIPENDIARY MAGISTRATE

The editorial office of _The Atheist_ had for some years past
become less and less prominently interesting as a feature of
Ludgate Hill. The paper was unsuited to the atmosphere. It showed
an interest in the Bible unknown in the district, and a knowledge
of that volume to which nobody else on Ludgate Hill could make
any conspicuous claim. It was in vain that the editor of _The
Atheist_ filled his front window with fierce and final demands as
to what Noah in the Ark did with the neck of the giraffe. It was
in vain that he asked violently, as for the last time, how the
statement "God is Spirit" could be reconciled with the statement
"The earth is His footstool." It was in vain that he cried with
an accusing energy that the Bishop of London was paid L12,000 a
year for pretending to believe that the whale swallowed Jonah. It
was in vain that he hung in conspicuous places the most thrilling
scientific calculations about the width of the throat of a whale. Was it nothing to them all they that passed by? Did his sudden
and splendid and truly sincere indignation never stir any of the
people pouring down Ludgate Hill? Never. The little man who
edited _The Atheist_ would rush from his shop on starlit evenings
and shake his fist at St. Paul's in the passion of his holy war
upon the holy place. He might have spared his emotion. The cross
at the top of St. Paul's and _The Atheist_ shop at the foot of it
were alike remote from the world. The shop and the Cross were
equally uplifted and alone in the empty heavens. To the little man who edited _The Atheist_, a fiery little
Scotchman, with fiery, red hair and beard, going by the name of
Turnbull, all this decline in public importance seemed not so
much sad or even mad, but merely bewildering and unaccountable. He had said the worst thing that could be said; and it seemed
accepted and ignored like the ordinary second best of the
politicians. Every day his blasphemies looked more glaring, and
every day the dust lay thicker upon them. It made him feel as if
he were moving in a world of idiots. He seemed among a race of
men who smiled when told of their own death, or looked vacantly
at the Day of Judgement. Year after year went by, and year after
year the death of God in a shop in Ludgate became a less and less
important occurrence. All the forward men of his age discouraged
Turnbull. The socialists said he was cursing priests when he
should be cursing capitalists. The artists said that the soul was
most spiritual, not when freed from religion, but when freed from
morality. Year after year went by, and at least a man came by who
treated Mr. Turnbull's secularist shop with a real respect and
seriousness. He was a young man in a grey plaid, and he smashed
the window. He was a young man, born in the Bay of Arisaig, opposite Rum and
the Isle of Skye. His high, hawklike features and snaky black
hair bore the mark of that unknown historic thing which is
crudely called Celtic, but which is probably far older than the
Celts, whoever they were. He was in name and stock a Highlander
of the Macdonalds; but his family took, as was common in such
cases, the name of a subordinate sept as a surname, and for all
the purposes which could be answered in London, he called himself
Evan MacIan. He had been brought up in some loneliness and
seclusion as a strict Roman Catholic, in the midst of that little
wedge of Roman Catholics which is driven into the Western
Highlands. And he had found his way as far as Fleet Street,
seeking some half-promised employment, without having properly
realized that there were in the world any people who were not
Roman Catholics. He had uncovered himself for a few moments
before the statue of Queen Anne, in front of St. Paul's
Cathedral, under the firm impression that it was a figure of the
Virgin Mary. He was somewhat surprised at the lack of deference
shown to the figure by the people bustling by. He did not
understand that their one essential historical principle, the one
law truly graven on their hearts, was the great and comforting
statement that Queen Anne is dead. This faith was as fundamental
as his faith, that Our Lady was alive. Any persons he had talked
to since he had touched the fringe of our fashion or civilization
had been by a coincidence, sympathetic or hypocritical. Or if
they had spoken some established blasphemies, he had been unable
to understand them merely owing to the preoccupied satisfaction
of his mind. On that fantastic fringe of the Gaelic land where he walked as a
boy, the cliffs were as fantastic as the clouds. Heaven seemed to
humble itself and come closer to the earth. The common paths of
his little village began to climb quite suddenly and seemed
resolved to go to heaven. The sky seemed to fall down towards the
hills; the hills took hold upon the sky. In the sumptuous sunset
of gold and purple and peacock green cloudlets and islets were
the same. Evan lived like a man walking on a borderland, the
borderland between this world and another. Like so many men and
nations who grow up with nature and the common things, he
understood the supernatural before he understood the natural. He
had looked at dim angels standing knee-deep in the grass before
he had looked at the grass. He knew that Our Lady's robes were
blue before he knew the wild roses round her feet were red. The
deeper his memory plunged into the dark house of childhood the
nearer and nearer he came to the things that cannot be named. All through his life he thought of the daylight world as a sort
of divine debris, the broken remainder of his first vision. The
skies and mountains were the splendid off-scourings of another
place. The stars were lost jewels of the Queen. Our Lady had
gone and left the stars by accident. His private tradition was equally wild and unworldly. His
great-grandfather had been cut down at Culloden, certain in his
last instant that God would restore the King. His grandfather,
then a boy of ten, had taken the terrible claymore from the hand
of the dead and hung it up in his house, burnishing it and
sharpening it for sixty years, to be ready for the next
rebellion. His father, the youngest son and the last left alive,
had refused to attend on Queen Victoria in Scotland. And Evan
himself had been of one piece with his progenitors; and was not
dead with them, but alive in the twentieth century. He was not
in the least the pathetic Jacobite of whom we read, left behind
by a final advance of all things. He was, in his own fancy, a
conspirator, fierce and up to date. In the long, dark afternoons
of the Highland winter, he plotted and fumed in the dark. He
drew plans of the capture of London on the desolate sand of
Arisaig. When he came up to capture London, it was not with an army of
white cockades, but with a stick and a satchel. London overawed
him a little, not because he thought it grand or even terrible,
but because it bewildered him; it was not the Golden City or even
hell; it was Limbo. He had one shock of sentiment, when he turned
that wonderful corner of Fleet Street and saw St. Paul's sitting
in the sky. "Ah," he said, after a long pause, "that sort of thing was built
under the Stuarts!" Then with a sour grin he asked himself what
was the corresponding monument of the Brunswicks and the
Protestant Constitution. After some warning, he selected a
sky-sign of some pill. Half an hour afterwards his emotions left him with an emptied
mind on the same spot.