Pardon me Caius Cassius:
The Enemies of Caesar, shall say this:
Then, in a Friend, it is cold Modestie

   Cassi. I blame you not for praising Caesar so. But what compact meane you to haue with vs? Will you be prick'd in number of our Friends,
Or shall we on, and not depend on you? Ant. Therefore I tooke your hands, but was indeed
Sway'd from the point, by looking downe on Caesar. Friends am I with you all, and loue you all,
Vpon this hope, that you shall giue me Reasons,
Why, and wherein, Caesar was dangerous

   Bru. Or else were this a sauage Spectacle:
Our Reasons are so full of good regard,
That were you Antony, the Sonne of Caesar,
You should be satisfied

   Ant. That's all I seeke,
And am moreouer sutor, that I may
Produce his body to the Market-place,
And in the Pulpit as becomes a Friend,
Speake in the Order of his Funerall

   Bru. You shall Marke Antony

   Cassi. Brutus, a word with you:
You know not what you do; Do not consent
That Antony speake in his Funerall:
Know you how much the people may be mou'd
By that which he will vtter

   Bru. By your pardon:
I will my selfe into the Pulpit first,
And shew the reason of our Caesars death. What Antony shall speake, I will protest
He speakes by leaue, and by permission:
And that we are contented Caesar shall
Haue all true Rites, and lawfull Ceremonies,
It shall aduantage more, then do vs wrong

   Cassi. I know not what may fall, I like it not

   Bru. Mark Antony, heere take you Caesars body:
You shall not in your Funerall speech blame vs,
But speake all good you can deuise of Caesar,
And say you doo't by our permission:
Else shall you not haue any hand at all
About his Funerall. And you shall speake
In the same Pulpit whereto I am going,
After my speech is ended

   Ant. Be it so:
I do desire no more

   Bru. Prepare the body then, and follow vs.

Exeunt. Manet Antony. O pardon me, thou bleeding peece of Earth:
That I am meeke and gentle with these Butchers. Thou art the Ruines of the Noblest man
That euer liued in the Tide of Times. Woe to the hand that shed this costly Blood. Ouer thy wounds, now do I Prophesie,
(Which like dumbe mouthes do ope their Ruby lips,
To begge the voyce and vtterance of my Tongue)
A Curse shall light vpon the limbes of men;
Domesticke Fury, and fierce Ciuill strife,
Shall cumber all the parts of Italy:
Blood and destruction shall be so in vse,
And dreadfull Obiects so familiar,
That Mothers shall but smile, when they behold
Their Infants quartered with the hands of Warre:
All pitty choak'd with custome of fell deeds,
And Caesars Spirit ranging for Reuenge,
With Ate by his side, come hot from Hell,
Shall in these Confines, with a Monarkes voyce,
Cry hauocke, and let slip the Dogges of Warre,
That this foule deede, shall smell aboue the earth
With Carrion men, groaning for Buriall. Enter Octauio's Seruant. You serue Octauius Caesar, do you not? Ser. I do Marke Antony

   Ant. Caesar did write for him to come to Rome

   Ser. He did receiue his Letters, and is comming,
And bid me say to you by word of mouth-
O Caesar! Ant. Thy heart is bigge: get thee a-part and weepe:
Passion I see is catching from mine eyes,
Seeing those Beads of sorrow stand in thine,
Began to water. Is thy Master comming? Ser. He lies to night within seuen Leagues of Rome

   Ant. Post backe with speede,
And tell him what hath chanc'd:
Heere is a mourning Rome, a dangerous Rome,
No Rome of safety for Octauius yet,
Hie hence, and tell him so. Yet stay a-while,
Thou shalt not backe, till I haue borne this course
Into the Market place: There shall I try
In my Oration, how the People take
The cruell issue of these bloody men,
According to the which, thou shalt discourse
To yong Octauius, of the state of things. Lend me your hand. Exeunt. Enter Brutus and goes into the Pulpit, and Cassius, with the
Plebeians. Ple. We will be satisfied: let vs be satisfied

   Bru. Then follow me, and giue me Audience friends. Cassius go you into the other streete,
And part the Numbers:
Those that will heare me speake, let 'em stay heere;
Those that will follow Cassius, go with him,
And publike Reasons shall be rendred
Of Caesars death

   1.Ple. I will heare Brutus speake

   2. I will heare Cassius, and compare their Reasons,
When seuerally we heare them rendred

   3. The Noble Brutus is ascended: Silence

   Bru. Be patient till the last. Romans, Countrey-men, and Louers, heare mee for my
cause, and be silent, that you may heare. Beleeue me for
mine Honor, and haue respect to mine Honor, that you
may beleeue. Censure me in your Wisedom, and awake
your Senses, that you may the better Iudge. If there bee
any in this Assembly, any deere Friend of Caesars, to him
I say, that Brutus loue to Caesar, was no lesse then his. If
then, that Friend demand, why Brutus rose against Caesar,
this is my answer: Not that I lou'd Caesar lesse, but
that I lou'd Rome more. Had you rather Caesar were liuing,
and dye all Slaues; then that Caesar were dead, to
liue all Free-men? As Caesar lou'd mee, I weepe for him;
as he was Fortunate, I reioyce at it; as he was Valiant, I
honour him: But, as he was Ambitious, I slew him. There
is Teares, for his Loue: Ioy, for his Fortune: Honor, for
his Valour: and Death, for his Ambition. Who is heere
so base, that would be a Bondman? If any, speak, for him
haue I offended. Who is heere so rude, that would not
be a Roman? If any, speak, for him haue I offended. Who
is heere so vile, that will not loue his Countrey? If any,
speake, for him haue I offended. I pause for a Reply

   All. None Brutus, none

   Brutus. Then none haue I offended. I haue done no
more to Caesar, then you shall do to Brutus. The Question
of his death, is inroll'd in the Capitoll: his Glory not
extenuated, wherein he was worthy; nor his offences enforc'd,
for which he suffered death. Enter Mark Antony, with Caesars body. Heere comes his Body, mourn'd by Marke Antony, who
though he had no hand in his death, shall receiue the benefit
of his dying, a place in the Co[m]monwealth, as which
of you shall not. With this I depart, that as I slewe my
best Louer for the good of Rome, I haue the same Dagger
for my selfe, when it shall please my Country to need
my death

   All. Liue Brutus, liue, liue

   1. Bring him with Triumph home vnto his house

   2. Giue him a Statue with his Ancestors

   3. Let him be Caesar

   4. Caesars better parts,
Shall be Crown'd in Brutus

   1. Wee'l bring him to his House,
With Showts and Clamors

   Bru. My Country-men

   2. Peace, silence, Brutus speakes

   1. Peace ho

   Bru. Good Countrymen, let me depart alone,
And (for my sake) stay heere with Antony:
Do grace to Caesars Corpes, and grace his Speech
Tending to Caesars Glories, which Marke Antony
(By our permission) is allow'd to make. I do intreat you, not a man depart,
Saue I alone, till Antony haue spoke. Exit

  1 Stay ho, and let vs heare Mark Antony

   3 Let him go vp into the publike Chaire,
Wee'l heare him: Noble Antony go vp

   Ant. For Brutus sake, I am beholding to you

   4 What does he say of Brutus? 3 He sayes, for Brutus sake
He findes himselfe beholding to vs all

   4 'Twere best he speake no harme of Brutus heere? 1 This Caesar was a Tyrant

   3 Nay that's certaine:
We are blest that Rome is rid of him

   2 Peace, let vs heare what Antony can say

   Ant. You gentle Romans

   All. Peace hoe, let vs heare him

   An. Friends, Romans, Countrymen, lend me your ears:
I come to bury Caesar, not to praise him:
The euill that men do, liues after them,
The good is oft enterred with their bones,
So let it be with Caesar. The Noble Brutus,
Hath told you Caesar was Ambitious:
If it were so, it was a greeuous Fault,
And greeuously hath Caesar answer'd it. Heere, vnder leaue of Brutus, and the rest
(For Brutus is an Honourable man,
So are they all; all Honourable men)
Come I to speake in Caesars Funerall. He was my Friend, faithfull, and iust to me;
But Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious,
And Brutus is an Honourable man. He hath brought many Captiues home to Rome,
Whose Ransomes, did the generall Coffers fill:
Did this in Caesar seeme Ambitious? When that the poore haue cry'de, Caesar hath wept:
Ambition should be made of sterner stuffe,
Yet Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious:
And Brutus is an Honourable man. You all did see, that on the Lupercall,
I thrice presented him a Kingly Crowne,
Which he did thrice refuse. Was this Ambition? Yet Brutus sayes, he was Ambitious:
And sure he is an Honourable man. I speake not to disprooue what Brutus spoke,
But heere I am, to speake what I do know;
You all did loue him once, not without cause,
What cause with-holds you then, to mourne for him? O Iudgement! thou are fled to brutish Beasts,
And Men haue lost their Reason. Beare with me,
My heart is in the Coffin there with Caesar,
And I must pawse, till it come backe to me

   1 Me thinkes there is much reason in his sayings

   2 If thou consider rightly of the matter,
Caesar ha's had great wrong

   3 Ha's hee Masters? I feare there will a worse come in his place

   4.