One was tall and dark, the other short and
red-haired. They ordered a pot of ale each. "MacIan," said Turnbull, lifting his tankard, "the fool who
wanted us to be friends made us want to go on fighting. It is
only natural that the fool who wanted us to fight should make us
friendly. MacIan, your health!" Dusk was already dropping, the rustics in the tavern were already
lurching and lumbering out of it by twos and threes, crying
clamorous good nights to a solitary old toper that remained,
before MacIan and Turnbull had reached the really important part
of their discussion. MacIan wore an expression of sad bewilderment not uncommon with
him. "I am to understand, then," he said, "that you don't believe
in nature." "You may say so in a very special and emphatic sense," said
Turnbull. "I do not believe in nature, just as I do not believe
in Odin. She is a myth. It is not merely that I do not believe
that nature can guide us. It is that I do not believe that nature
exists." "Exists?" said MacIan in his monotonous way, settling his pewter
pot on the table. "Yes, in a real sense nature does not exist. I mean that nobody
can discover what the original nature of things would have been
if things had not interfered with it. The first blade of grass
began to tear up the earth and eat it; it was interfering with
nature, if there is any nature. The first wild ox began to tear
up the grass and eat it; he was interfering with nature, if there
is any nature. In the same way," continued Turnbull, "the human
when it asserts its dominance over nature is just as natural as
the thing which it destroys." "And in the same way," said MacIan almost dreamily, "the
superhuman, the supernatural is just as natural as the nature
which it destroys." Turnbull took his head out of his pewter pot in some anger. "The supernatural, of course," he said, "is quite another thing;
the case of the supernatural is simple. The supernatural does not
exist." "Quite so," said MacIan in a rather dull voice; "you said the
same about the natural. If the natural does not exist the
supernatural obviously can't." And he yawned a little over his
ale. Turnbull turned for some reason a little red and remarked
quickly, "That may be jolly clever, for all I know. But everyone
does know that there is a division between the things that as a
matter of fact do commonly happen and the things that don't. Things that break the evident laws of nature----"

"Which does not exist," put in MacIan sleepily. Turnbull struck
the table with a sudden hand. "Good Lord in heaven!" he cried----

"Who does not exist," murmured MacIan. "Good Lord in heaven!" thundered Turnbull, without regarding the
interruption. "Do you really mean to sit there and say that you,
like anybody else, would not recognize the difference between a
natural occurrence and a supernatural one--if there could be such
a thing? If I flew up to the ceiling----"

"You would bump your head badly," cried MacIan, suddenly starting
up. "One can't talk of this kind of thing under a ceiling at all. Come outside! Come outside and ascend into heaven!" He burst the door open on a blue abyss of evening and they
stepped out into it: it was suddenly and strangely cool. "Turnbull," said MacIan, "you have said some things so true and
some so false that I want to talk; and I will try to talk so that
you understand. For at present you do not understand at all. We
don't seem to mean the same things by the same words." He stood silent for a second or two and then resumed. "A minute or two ago I caught you out in a real contradiction. At
that moment logically I was right. And at that moment I knew I
was wrong. Yes, there is a real difference between the natural
and the supernatural: if you flew up into that blue sky this
instant, I should think that you were moved by God--or the devil. But if you want to know what I really think...I must explain." He stopped again, abstractedly boring the point of his sword into
the earth, and went on:

"I was born and bred and taught in a complete universe. The
supernatural was not natural, but it was perfectly reasonable. Nay, the supernatural to me is more reasonable than the natural;
for the supernatural is a direct message from God, who is reason. I was taught that some things are natural and some things divine. I mean that some things are mechanical and some things divine. But there is the great difficulty, Turnbull. The great difficulty
is that, according to my teaching, you are divine." "Me! Divine?" said Turnbull truculently. "What do you mean?" "That is just the difficulty," continued MacIan thoughtfully. "I
was told that there was a difference between the grass and a
man's will; and the difference was that a man's will was special
and divine. A man's free will, I heard, was supernatural." "Rubbish!" said Turnbull. "Oh," said MacIan patiently, "then if a man's free will isn't
supernatural, why do your materialists deny that it exists?" Turnbull was silent for a moment. Then he began to speak, but
MacIan continued with the same steady voice and sad eyes:

"So what I feel is this: Here is the great divine creation I was
taught to believe in. I can understand your disbelieving in it,
but why disbelieve in a part of it? It was all one thing to me. God had authority because he was God. Man had authority because
he was man. You cannot prove that God is better than a man; nor
can you prove that a man is better than a horse. Why permit any
ordinary thing? Why do you let a horse be saddled?" "Some modern thinkers disapprove of it," said Turnbull a little
doubtfully. "I know," said MacIan grimly; "that man who talked about love,
for instance." Turnbull made a humorous grimace; then he said: "We seem to be
talking in a kind of shorthand; but I won't pretend not to
understand you. What you mean is this: that you learnt about all
your saints and angels at the same time as you learnt about
common morality, from the same people, in the same way. And you
mean to say that if one may be disputed, so may the other. Well,
let that pass for the moment. But let me ask you a question in
turn. Did not this system of yours, which you swallowed whole,
contain all sorts of things that were merely local, the respect
for the chief of your clan, or such things; the village ghost,
the family feud, or what not? Did you not take in those things,
too, along with your theology?" MacIan stared along the dim village road, down which the last
straggler from the inn was trailing his way. "What you say is not unreasonable," he said. "But it is not quite
true. The distinction between the chief and us did exist; but it
was never anything like the distinction between the human and the
divine, or the human and the animal. It was more like the
distinction between one animal and another. But----"

"Well?" said Turnbull. MacIan was silent. "Go on," repeated Turnbull; "what's the matter with you? What are
you staring at?" "I am staring," said MacIan at last, "at that which shall judge
us both." "Oh, yes," said Turnbull in a tired way, "I suppose you mean
God." "No, I don't," said MacIan, shaking his head. "I mean him." And he pointed to the half-tipsy yokel who was ploughing down the
road.