Ham. What hoa, Horatio? Hora. Heere sweet Lord, at your Seruice

   Ham. Horatio, thou art eene as iust a man
As ere my Conuersation coap'd withall

   Hora. O my deere Lord

   Ham. Nay, do not thinke I flatter:
For what aduancement may I hope from thee,
That no Reuennew hast, but thy good spirits
To feed & cloath thee. Why shold the poor be flatter'd? No, let the Candied tongue, like absurd pompe,
And crooke the pregnant Hindges of the knee,
Where thrift may follow faining? Dost thou heare,
Since my deere Soule was Mistris of my choyse,
And could of men distinguish, her election
Hath seal'd thee for her selfe. For thou hast bene
As one in suffering all, that suffers nothing. A man that Fortunes buffets, and Rewards
Hath 'tane with equall Thankes. And blest are those,
Whose Blood and Iudgement are so well co-mingled,
That they are not a Pipe for Fortunes finger. To sound what stop she please. Giue me that man,
That is not Passions Slaue, and I will weare him
In my hearts Core. I, in my Heart of heart,
As I do thee. Something too much of this. There is a Play to night to before the King. One Scoene of it comes neere the Circumstance
Which I haue told thee, of my Fathers death. I prythee, when thou see'st that Acte a-foot,
Euen with the verie Comment of my Soule
Obserue mine Vnkle: If his occulted guilt,
Do not it selfe vnkennell in one speech,
It is a damned Ghost that we haue seene:
And my Imaginations are as foule
As Vulcans Stythe. Giue him needfull note,
For I mine eyes will riuet to his Face:
And after we will both our iudgements ioyne,
To censure of his seeming

   Hora. Well my Lord. If he steale ought the whil'st this Play is Playing,
And scape detecting, I will pay the Theft. Enter King, Queene, Polonius, Ophelia, Rosincrance,
Guildensterne, and
other Lords attendant with his Guard carrying Torches. Danish
March. Sound
a Flourish. Ham. They are comming to the Play: I must be idle. Get you a place

   King. How fares our Cosin Hamlet? Ham. Excellent Ifaith, of the Camelions dish: I eate
the Ayre promise-cramm'd, you cannot feed Capons so

   King. I haue nothing with this answer Hamlet, these
words are not mine

   Ham. No, nor mine. Now my Lord, you plaid once
i'th' Vniuersity, you say? Polon. That I did my Lord, and was accounted a good
Actor

   Ham. And what did you enact? Pol. I did enact Iulius Caesar, I was kill'd i'th' Capitol:
Brutus kill'd me

   Ham. It was a bruite part of him, to kill so Capitall a
Calfe there. Be the Players ready? Rosin. I my Lord, they stay vpon your patience

   Qu. Come hither my good Hamlet, sit by me

   Ha. No good Mother, here's Mettle more attractiue

   Pol. Oh ho, do you marke that? Ham. Ladie, shall I lye in your Lap? Ophe. No my Lord

   Ham. I meane, my Head vpon your Lap? Ophe. I my Lord

   Ham. Do you thinke I meant Country matters? Ophe. I thinke nothing, my Lord

   Ham. That's a faire thought to ly betweene Maids legs
  Ophe. What is my Lord? Ham. Nothing

   Ophe. You are merrie, my Lord? Ham. Who I? Ophe. I my Lord

   Ham. Oh God, your onely Iigge-maker: what should
a man do, but be merrie. For looke you how cheerefully
my Mother lookes, and my Father dyed within's two
Houres

   Ophe. Nay, 'tis twice two moneths, my Lord

   Ham. So long? Nay then let the Diuel weare blacke,
for Ile haue a suite of Sables. Oh Heauens! dye two moneths
ago, and not forgotten yet? Then there's hope, a
great mans Memorie, may out-liue his life halfe a yeare:
But byrlady he must builde Churches then: or else shall
he suffer not thinking on, with the Hoby-horsse, whose
Epitaph is, For o, For o, the Hoby-horse is forgot. Hoboyes play. The dumbe shew enters. Enter a King and Queene, very louingly; the Queene embracing
him. She
kneeles, and makes shew of Protestation vnto him. He takes her
vp, and
declines his head vpon her neck. Layes him downe vpon a Banke
of Flowers. She seeing him a-sleepe, leaues him. Anon comes in a Fellow,
takes off his
Crowne, kisses it, and powres poyson in the Kings eares, and
Exits. The
Queene returnes, findes the King dead, and makes passionate
Action. The
Poysoner, with some two or three Mutes comes in againe, seeming
to lament
with her. The dead body is carried away: The Poysoner Wooes the
Queene with
Gifts, she seemes loath and vnwilling awhile, but in the end,
accepts his
loue. Exeunt. Ophe. What meanes this, my Lord? Ham. Marry this is Miching Malicho, that meanes
Mischeefe

   Ophe. Belike this shew imports the Argument of the
Play? Ham. We shall know by these Fellowes: the Players
cannot keepe counsell, they'l tell all

   Ophe. Will they tell vs what this shew meant? Ham. I, or any shew that you'l shew him. Bee not
you asham'd to shew, hee'l not shame to tell you what it
meanes

   Ophe. You are naught, you are naught, Ile marke the
Play. Enter Prologue. For vs, and for our Tragedie,
Heere stooping to your Clemencie:
We begge your hearing Patientlie

   Ham.