"Oh, no." "Then you can buy another with that," said Laura, dropping the half-
guinea into her hand; and she shut the window before the child could find
words to thank her, but not before she saw a look of joy and gratitude,
which gave Laura more pleasure probably than all the praise which could
have been bestowed upon her generosity. Late on the morning of her cousin's birthday, Rosamond finished her work-
basket. The carriage was at the door--Laura came running to call her;
her father's voice was heard at the same instant; so she was obliged to
go down with her basket but half wrapped up in silver paper--a
circumstance at which she was a good deal disconcerted; for the pleasure
of surprising Bell would be utterly lost if one bit of the filigree
should peep out before the proper time. As the carriage went on,
Rosamond pulled the paper to one side and to the other, and by each of
the four corners. "It will never do, my dear," said her father, who had been watching her
operations. "I am afraid you will never make a sheet of paper cover a
box which is twice as large as itself." "It is not a box, father," said Rosamond, a little peevishly; "it's a
basket." "Let us look at this basket," said he, taking it out of her unwilling
hands, for she knew of what frail materials it was made, and she dreaded
its coming to pieces under her father's examination. He took hold of the
handle rather roughly; when, starting off the coach seat, she cried, "Oh,
sir! father! sir! you will spoil it indeed!" said she, with increased
vehemence, when, after drawing aside the veil of silver paper, she saw
him grasp the myrtle wreathed handle. "Indeed, sir, you will spoil the
poor handle." "But what is the use of THE POOR HANDLE," said her father, "if we are not
to take hold of it? And pray," continued he, turning the basket round
with his finger and thumb, rather in a disrespectful manner, "pray, is
this the thing you have been about all this week? I have seen you all
this week dabbling with paste and rags; I could not conceive what you
were about. Is this the thing?" "Yes, sir. You think, then, that I have wasted my time, because the
basket is of no use; but then it is a present for my Cousin Bell." "Your Cousin Bell will be very much obliged to you for a present that is
of no use. You had better have given her the purple jar." "Oh, father! I thought you had forgotten that--it was two years ago; I'm
not so silly now. But Bell will like the basket, I know, though it is of
no use." "Then you think Bell is sillier now than you were two years ago,--well,
perhaps that is true; but how comes it, Rosamond, now that you are so
wise, that you are fond of such a silly person?" "_I_, father?" said Rosamond, hesitating, "I don't think I am VERY fond
of her." "I did not say VERY fond." "Well, but I don't think I am at all fond of her." "But you have spent a whole week in making this thing for her." "Yes, and all my half guinea besides." "Yet you think her silly, and you are not fond of her at all; and you say
you know this thing will be of no use to her." "But it is her birthday, sir; and I am sure she will EXPECT something,
and everybody else will give her something." "Then your reason for giving is because she expects you to give her
something. And will you, or can you, or should you, always give, merely
because others EXPECT, or because somebody else gives?" "Always?--no, not always." "Oh, only on birthdays." Rosamond, laughing:  "Now you are making a joke of me, papa, I see; but I
thought you liked that people should be generous,--my godmother said that
she did." "So do I, full as well as your godmother; but we have not yet quite
settled what it is to be generous." "Why is it not generous to make presents?" said Rosamond. "That is the question which it would take up a great deal of time to
answer. But, for instance, to make a present of a thing that you know
can be of no use to a person you neither love nor esteem, because it is
her birthday, and because everybody gives her something, and because she
expects something, and because your godmother says she likes that people
should be generous, seems to me, my dear Rosamond, to be, since I must
say it, rather more like folly than generosity." Rosamond looked down upon the basket, and was silent. "Then I am a fool,
am I?" said she looking up at last. "Because you have made ONE mistake? No. If you have sense enough to see
your own mistakes, and can afterwards avoid them, you will never be a
fool." Here the carriage stopped, and Rosamond recollected that the basket was
uncovered. Now we must observe, that Rosamond's father had not been too severe upon
Bell when he called her a silly girl. From her infancy she had been
humoured; and at eight years old she had the misfortune to be a spoiled
child. She was idle, fretful, and selfish; so that nothing could make
her happy. On her birthday she expected, however, to be perfectly happy. Everybody in the house tried to please her, and they succeeded so well,
that between breakfast and dinner she had only six fits of crying. The
cause of five of these fits no one could discover:  but the last, and
most lamentable, was occasioned by a disappointment about a worked muslin
frock; and accordingly, at dressing time, her maid brought it to her,
exclaiming, "See here, miss, what your mamma has sent you on your
birthday. Here's a frock fit for a queen--if it had but lace round the
cuffs." "And why has not it lace around the cuffs? mamma said it should." "Yes, but mistress was disappointed about the lace; it is not come home." "Not come home, indeed! and didn't they know it was my birthday? But
then I say I won't wear it without the lace--I can't wear it without the
lace, and I won't." The lace, however, could not be had; and Bell at length submitted to let
the frock be put on. "Come, Miss Bell, dry your eyes," said the maid who educated her; "dry
your eyes, and I'll tell you something that will please you." "What, then?" said the child, pouting and sobbing. "Why--but you must not tell that I told you." "No,--but if I am asked?" "Why, if you are asked, you must tell the truth, to be sure. So I'll
hold my tongue, miss." "Nay, tell me, though, and I'll never tell--if I AM asked." "Well, then," said the maid, "your cousin Rosamond is come, and has
brought you the most BEAUTIFULLEST thing you ever saw in your life; but
you are not to know anything about it till after dinner, because she
wants to surprise you; and mistress has put it into her wardrobe till
after dinner." "Till after dinner!" repeated Bell, impatiently; "I can't wait till then;
I must see it this minute." The maid refused her several times, till
Bell burst into another fit of crying, and the maid, fearing that her
mistress would be angry with HER, if Bell's eyes were red at dinner time,
consented to show her the basket. "How pretty!--but let me have it in my own hands," said Bell, as the maid
held the basket up out of her reach. "Oh, no, you must not touch it; for if you should spoil it, what would
become of me?" "Become of you, indeed!" exclaimed the spoiled child, who never
considered anything but her own immediate gratification--"Become of YOU,
indeed! what signifies that--I sha'n't spoil it; and I will have it in my
own hands. If you don't hold it down for me directly, I'll tell that you
showed it to me." "Then you won't snatch it?" "No, no, I won't indeed," said Bell; but she had learned from her maid a
total disregard of truth. She snatched the basket the moment it was
within her reach. A struggle ensued, in which the handle and lid were
torn off, and one of the medallions crushed inwards, before the little
fury returned to her senses. Calmed at this sight, the next question was, how she should conceal the
mischief which she had done. After many attempts, the handle and lid
were replaced; the basket was put exactly in the same spot in which it
had stood before, and the maid charged the child, "TO LOOK AS IF NOTHING
WAS THE MATTER." We hope that both children and parents will here pause for a moment to
reflect. The habits of tyranny, meanness, and falsehood, which children
acquire from living with bad servants, are scarcely ever conquered in the
whole course of their future lives. After shutting up the basket they left the room, and in the adjoining
passage they found a poor girl waiting with a small parcel in her hand. "What's your business?" said the maid. "I have brought home the lace, madam, that was bespoke for the young
lady." "Oh, you have, have you, at last?" said Bell; "and pray why didn't you
bring it sooner?" The girl was going to answer, but the maid interrupted
her, saying--"Come, come, none of your excuses; you are a little idle,
good-for-nothing thing, to disappoint Miss Bell upon her birthday. But
now you have brought it, let us look at it!"