"There's a village down the road, past the pool," answered
Turnbull. "I can see it from here. I can see the whitewashed
walls of some cottages and a kind of corner of the church. How
jolly it all looks. It looks so--I don't know what the word
is--so sensible. Don't fancy I'm under any illusions about
Arcadian virtue and the innocent villagers. Men make beasts of
themselves there with drink, but they don't deliberately make
devils of themselves with mere talking. They kill wild animals in
the wild woods, but they don't kill cats to the God of Victory. They don't----"  He broke off and suddenly spat on the ground. "Excuse me," he said; "it was ceremonial. One has to get the
taste out of one's mouth." "The taste of what?" asked MacIan. "I don't know the exact name for it," replied Turnbull. "Perhaps
it is the South Sea Islands, or it may be Magdalen College." There was a long pause, and MacIan also lifted his large limbs
off the ground--his eyes particularly dreamy. "I know what you mean, Turnbull," he said, "but...I always
thought you people agreed with all that." "With all that about doing as one likes, and the individual, and
Nature loving the strongest, and all the things which that
cockroach talked about." Turnbull's big blue-grey eyes stood open with a grave
astonishment. "Do you really mean to say, MacIan," he said, "that you fancied
that we, the Free-thinkers, that Bradlaugh, or Holyoake, or
Ingersoll, believe all that dirty, immoral mysticism about
Nature? Damn Nature!" "I supposed you did," said MacIan calmly. "It seems to me your
most conclusive position." "And you mean to tell me," rejoined the other, "that you broke my
window, and challenged me to mortal combat, and tied a tradesman
up with ropes, and chased an Oxford Fellow across five
meadows--all under the impression that I am such an illiterate
idiot as to believe in Nature!" "I supposed you did," repeated MacIan with his usual mildness;
"but I admit that I know little of the details of your belief--or
disbelief." Turnbull swung round quite suddenly, and set off towards the
village. "Come along," he cried. "Come down to the village. Come down to
the nearest decent inhabitable pub. This is a case for beer." "I do not quite follow you," said the Highlander. "Yes, you do," answered Turnbull. "You follow me slap into the
inn-parlour. I repeat, this is a case for beer. We must have the
whole of this matter out thoroughly before we go a step farther. Do you know that an idea has just struck me of great simplicity
and of some cogency. Do not by any means let us drop our
intentions of settling our differences with two steel swords. But do you not think that with two pewter pots we might do what
we really have never thought of doing yet--discover what our
difference is?" "It never occurred to me before," answered MacIan with
tranquillity. "It is a good suggestion." And they set out at an easy swing down the steep road to the
village of Grassley-in-the-Hole. Grassley-in-the-Hole was a rude parallelogram of buildings, with
two thoroughfares which might have been called two high streets
if it had been possible to call them streets. One of these ways
was higher on the slope than the other, the whole parallelogram
lying aslant, so to speak, on the side of the hill. The upper of
these two roads was decorated with a big public house, a
butcher's shop, a small public house, a sweetstuff shop, a very
small public house, and an illegible signpost. The lower of the
two roads boasted a horse-pond, a post office, a gentleman's
garden with very high hedges, a microscopically small public
house, and two cottages. Where all the people lived who supported
all the public houses was in this, as in many other English
villages, a silent and smiling mystery. The church lay a little
above and beyond the village, with a square grey tower dominating
it decisively. But even the church was scarcely so central and solemn an
institution as the large public house, the Valencourt Arms. It
was named after some splendid family that had long gone bankrupt,
and whose seat was occupied by a man who had invented a hygienic
bootjack; but the unfathomable sentimentalism of the English
people insisted in regarding the Inn, the seat and the sitter in
it, as alike parts of a pure and marmoreal antiquity. And in the
Valencourt Arms festivity itself had some solemnity and decorum;
and beer was drunk with reverence, as it ought to be. Into the
principal parlour of this place entered two strangers, who found
themselves, as is always the case in such hostels, the object,
not of fluttered curiosity or pert inquiry, but of steady,
ceaseless, devouring ocular study. They had long coats down to
their heels, and carried under each coat something that looked
like a stick. One was tall and dark, the other short and
red-haired. They ordered a pot of ale each. "MacIan," said Turnbull, lifting his tankard, "the fool who
wanted us to be friends made us want to go on fighting. It is
only natural that the fool who wanted us to fight should make us
friendly. MacIan, your health!" Dusk was already dropping, the rustics in the tavern were already
lurching and lumbering out of it by twos and threes, crying
clamorous good nights to a solitary old toper that remained,
before MacIan and Turnbull had reached the really important part
of their discussion. MacIan wore an expression of sad bewilderment not uncommon with
him. "I am to understand, then," he said, "that you don't believe
in nature." "You may say so in a very special and emphatic sense," said
Turnbull. "I do not believe in nature, just as I do not believe
in Odin. She is a myth. It is not merely that I do not believe
that nature can guide us. It is that I do not believe that nature
exists." "Exists?" said MacIan in his monotonous way, settling his pewter
pot on the table. "Yes, in a real sense nature does not exist. I mean that nobody
can discover what the original nature of things would have been
if things had not interfered with it. The first blade of grass
began to tear up the earth and eat it; it was interfering with
nature, if there is any nature. The first wild ox began to tear
up the grass and eat it; he was interfering with nature, if there
is any nature. In the same way," continued Turnbull, "the human
when it asserts its dominance over nature is just as natural as
the thing which it destroys." "And in the same way," said MacIan almost dreamily, "the
superhuman, the supernatural is just as natural as the nature
which it destroys." Turnbull took his head out of his pewter pot in some anger. "The supernatural, of course," he said, "is quite another thing;
the case of the supernatural is simple. The supernatural does not
exist." "Quite so," said MacIan in a rather dull voice; "you said the
same about the natural. If the natural does not exist the
supernatural obviously can't." And he yawned a little over his
ale. Turnbull turned for some reason a little red and remarked
quickly, "That may be jolly clever, for all I know. But everyone
does know that there is a division between the things that as a
matter of fact do commonly happen and the things that don't. Things that break the evident laws of nature----"

"Which does not exist," put in MacIan sleepily. Turnbull struck
the table with a sudden hand. "Good Lord in heaven!" he cried----

"Who does not exist," murmured MacIan. "Good Lord in heaven!" thundered Turnbull, without regarding the
interruption. "Do you really mean to sit there and say that you,
like anybody else, would not recognize the difference between a
natural occurrence and a supernatural one--if there could be such
a thing? If I flew up to the ceiling----"

"You would bump your head badly," cried MacIan, suddenly starting
up. "One can't talk of this kind of thing under a ceiling at all. Come outside! Come outside and ascend into heaven!" He burst the door open on a blue abyss of evening and they
stepped out into it: it was suddenly and strangely cool. "Turnbull," said MacIan, "you have said some things so true and
some so false that I want to talk; and I will try to talk so that
you understand. For at present you do not understand at all. We
don't seem to mean the same things by the same words." He stood silent for a second or two and then resumed. "A minute or two ago I caught you out in a real contradiction. At
that moment logically I was right. And at that moment I knew I
was wrong.