etc." The _Daily Mail_ said, "People must learn, in the
modern world, to keep their theological differences to
themselves. The fracas, etc. etc." The _Daily News_ started,
"Nothing could be more inimical to the cause of true religion
than, etc. etc." The _Times_ began with something about Celtic
disturbances of the equilibrium of Empire, and the _Daily
Express_ distinguished itself splendidly by omitting altogether
so controversial a matter and substituting a leader about
goloshes. And the morning after that, the editors and the newspapers were
in such a state, that, as the phrase is, there was no holding
them. Whatever secret and elvish thing it is that broods over
editors and suddenly turns their brains, that thing had seized on
the story of the broken glass and the duel in the garden. It
became monstrous and omnipresent, as do in our time the
unimportant doings of the sect of the Agapemonites, or as did at
an earlier time the dreary dishonesties of the Rhodesian
financiers. Questions were asked about it, and even answered, in
the House of Commons. The Government was solemnly denounced in
the papers for not having done something, nobody knew what, to
prevent the window being broken. An enormous subscription was
started to reimburse Mr. Gordon, the man who had been gagged in
the shop. Mr. MacIan, one of the combatants, became for some
mysterious reason, singly and hugely popular as a comic figure in
the comic papers and on the stage of the music hall. He was
always represented (in defiance of fact), with red whiskers, and
a very red nose, and in full Highland costume. And a song,
consisting of an unimaginable number of verses, in which his name
was rhymed with flat iron, the British Lion, sly 'un, dandelion,
Spion (With Kop in the next line), was sung to crowded houses
every night. The papers developed a devouring thirst for the
capture of the fugitives; and when they had not been caught for
forty-eight hours, they suddenly turned the whole matter into a
detective mystery. Letters under the heading, "Where are They,"
poured in to every paper, with every conceivable kind of
explanation, running them to earth in the Monument, the Twopenny
Tube, Epping Forest, Westminster Abbey, rolled up in carpets at
Shoolbreds, locked up in safes in Chancery Lane. Yes, the papers
were very interesting, and Mr. Turnbull unrolled a whole bundle
of them for the amusement of Mr. MacIan as they sat on a high
common to the north of London, in the coming of the white dawn. The darkness in the east had been broken with a bar of grey; the
bar of grey was split with a sword of silver and morning lifted
itself laboriously over London. From the spot where Turnbull and
MacIan were sitting on one of the barren steeps behind Hampstead,
they could see the whole of London shaping itself vaguely and
largely in the grey and growing light, until the white sun stood
over it and it lay at their feet, the splendid monstrosity that
it is. Its bewildering squares and parallelograms were compact
and perfect as a Chinese puzzle; an enormous hieroglyphic which
man must decipher or die. There fell upon both of them, but upon
Turnbull more than the other, because he know more what the scene
signified, that quite indescribable sense as of a sublime and
passionate and heart-moving futility, which is never evoked by
deserts or dead men or men neglected and barbarous, which can
only be invoked by the sight of the enormous genius of man
applied to anything other than the best. Turnbull, the old
idealistic democrat, had so often reviled the democracy and
reviled them justly for their supineness, their snobbishness,
their evil reverence for idle things. He was right enough; for
our democracy has only one great fault; it is not democratic. And
after denouncing so justly average modern men for so many years
as sophists and as slaves, he looked down from an empty slope in
Hampstead and saw what gods they are. Their achievement seemed
all the more heroic and divine, because it seemed doubtful
whether it was worth doing at all. There seemed to be something
greater than mere accuracy in making such a mistake as London. And what was to be the end of it all? what was to be the ultimate
transformation of this common and incredible London man, this
workman on a tram in Battersea, his clerk on an omnibus in
Cheapside? Turnbull, as he stared drearily, murmured to himself
the words of the old atheistic and revolutionary Swinburne who
had intoxicated his youth:

        "And still we ask if God or man
        Can loosen thee Lazarus;
        Bid thee rise up republican,
        And save thyself and all of us. But no disciple's tongue can say
        If thou can'st take our sins away." Turnbull shivered slightly as if behind the earthly morning he
felt the evening of the world, the sunset of so many hopes. Those
words were from "Songs before Sunrise". But Turnbull's songs at
their best were songs after sunrise, and sunrise had been no such
great thing after all. Turnbull shivered again in the sharp
morning air. MacIan was also gazing with his face towards the
city, but there was that about his blind and mystical stare that
told one, so to speak, that his eyes were turned inwards. When
Turnbull said something to him about London, they seemed to move
as at a summons and come out like two householders coming out
into their doorways. "Yes," he said, with a sort of stupidity. "It's a very big
place." There was a somewhat unmeaning silence, and then MacIan said
again:

"It's a very big place. When I first came into it I was
frightened of it. Frightened exactly as one would be frightened
at the sight of a man forty feet high. I am used to big things
where I come from, big mountains that seem to fill God's
infinity, and the big sea that goes to the end of the world. But
then these things are all shapeless and confused things, not made
in any familiar form. But to see the plain, square, human things
as large as that, houses so large and streets so large, and the
town itself so large, was like having screwed some devil's
magnifying glass into one's eye. It was like seeing a porridge
bowl as big as a house, or a mouse-trap made to catch elephants." "Like the land of the Brobdingnagians," said Turnbull, smiling. "Oh! Where is that?" said MacIan. Turnbull said bitterly, "In a book," and the silence fell
suddenly between them again. They were sitting in a sort of litter on the hillside; all the
things they had hurriedly collected, in various places, for their
flight, were strewn indiscriminately round them. The two swords
with which they had lately sought each other's lives were flung
down on the grass at random, like two idle walking-sticks. Some
provisions they had bought last night, at a low public house, in
case of undefined contingencies, were tossed about like the
materials of an ordinary picnic, here a basket of chocolate, and
there a bottle of wine. And to add to the disorder finally, there
were strewn on top of everything, the most disorderly of modern
things, newspapers, and more newspapers, and yet again
newspapers, the ministers of the modern anarchy. Turnbull picked
up one of them drearily, and took out a pipe. "There's a lot about us," he said. "Do you mind if I light up?" "Why should I mind?" asked MacIan. Turnbull eyed with a certain studious interest, the man who did
not understand any of the verbal courtesies; he lit his pipe and
blew great clouds out of it. "Yes," he resumed. "The matter on which you and I are engaged is
at this moment really the best copy in England. I am a
journalist, and I know. For the first time, perhaps, for many
generations, the English are really more angry about a wrong
thing done in England than they are about a wrong thing done in
France." "It is not a wrong thing," said MacIan. Turnbull laughed. "You seem unable to understand the ordinary use
of the human language. If I did not suspect that you were a
genius, I should certainly know you were a blockhead. I fancy we
had better be getting along and collecting our baggage." And he jumped up and began shoving the luggage into his pockets,
or strapping it on to his back. As he thrust a tin of canned
meat, anyhow, into his bursting side pocket, he said casually:

"I only meant that you and I are the most prominent people in the
English papers." "Well, what did you expect?" asked MacIan, opening his great
grave blue eyes. "The papers are full of us," said Turnbull, stooping to pick up
one of the swords. MacIan stooped and picked up the other. "Yes," he said, in his simple way. "I have read what they have to
say. But they don't seem to understand the point." "The point of what?" asked Turnbull. "The point of the sword," said MacIan, violently, and planted the
steel point in the soil like a man planting a tree. "That is a point," said Turnbull, grimly, "that we will discuss
later. Come along." Turnbull tied the last tin of biscuits desperately to himself
with string; and then spoke, like a diver girt for plunging,
short and sharp. "Now, Mr. MacIan, you must listen to me. You must listen to me,
not merely because I know the country, which you might learn by
looking at a map, but because I know the people of the country,
whom you could not know by living here thirty years. That
infernal city down there is awake; and it is awake against us. All those endless rows of windows and windows are all eyes
staring at us. All those forests of chimneys are fingers pointing
at us, as we stand here on the hillside. This thing has caught
on. For the next six mortal months they will think of nothing but
us, as for six mortal months they thought of nothing but the
Dreyfus case. Oh, I know it's funny. They let starving children,
who don't want to die, drop by the score without looking round. But because two gentlemen, from private feelings of delicacy, do
want to die, they will mobilize the army and navy to prevent
them. For half a year or more, you and I, Mr. MacIan, will be an
obstacle to every reform in the British Empire. We shall prevent
the Chinese being sent out of the Transvaal and the blocks being
stopped in the Strand. We shall be the conversational substitute
when anyone recommends Home Rule, or complains of sky signs. Therefore, do not imagine, in your innocence, that we have only
to melt away among those English hills as a Highland cateran
might into your god-forsaken Highland mountains.