The number of the men of the people of
Israel: 2:3 The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred seventy
and two. 2:4 The children of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two. 2:5 The children of Arah, seven hundred seventy and five. 2:6 The children of Pahathmoab, of the children of Jeshua and Joab,
two thousand eight hundred and twelve. 2:7 The children of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and four. 2:8 The children of Zattu, nine hundred forty and five. 2:9 The children of Zaccai, seven hundred and threescore. 2:10 The children of Bani, six hundred forty and two. 2:11 The children of Bebai, six hundred twenty and three. 2:12 The children of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty and two. 2:13 The children of Adonikam, six hundred sixty and six. 2:14 The children of Bigvai, two thousand fifty and six. 2:15 The children of Adin, four hundred fifty and four. 2:16 The children of Ater of Hezekiah, ninety and eight. 2:17 The children of Bezai, three hundred twenty and three. 2:18 The children of Jorah, an hundred and twelve. 2:19 The children of Hashum, two hundred twenty and three. 2:20 The children of Gibbar, ninety and five. 2:21 The children of Bethlehem, an hundred twenty and three. 2:22 The men of Netophah, fifty and six. 2:23 The men of Anathoth, an hundred twenty and eight. 2:24 The children of Azmaveth, forty and two. 2:25 The children of Kirjatharim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven
hundred and forty and three. 2:26 The children of Ramah and Gaba, six hundred twenty and one. 2:27 The men of Michmas, an hundred twenty and two. 2:28 The men of Bethel and Ai, two hundred twenty and three. 2:29 The children of Nebo, fifty and two. 2:30 The children of Magbish, an hundred fifty and six. 2:31 The children of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty and
four. 2:32 The children of Harim, three hundred and twenty. 2:33 The children of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty and
five. 2:34 The children of Jericho, three hundred forty and five. 2:35 The children of Senaah, three thousand and six hundred and
thirty. 2:36 The priests: the children of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua,
nine hundred seventy and three. 2:37 The children of Immer, a thousand fifty and two. 2:38 The children of Pashur, a thousand two hundred forty and seven. 2:39 The children of Harim, a thousand and seventeen. 2:40 The Levites: the children of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the children
of Hodaviah, seventy and four. 2:41 The singers: the children of Asaph, an hundred twenty and eight. 2:42 The children of the porters: the children of Shallum, the
children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the children of Akkub, the
children of Hatita, the children of Shobai, in all an hundred thirty
and nine. 2:43 The Nethinims: the children of Ziha, the children of Hasupha, the
children of Tabbaoth, 2:44 The children of Keros, the children of
Siaha, the children of Padon, 2:45 The children of Lebanah, the
children of Hagabah, the children of Akkub, 2:46 The children of
Hagab, the children of Shalmai, the children of Hanan, 2:47 The
children of Giddel, the children of Gahar, the children of Reaiah,
2:48 The children of Rezin, the children of Nekoda, the children of
Gazzam, 2:49 The children of Uzza, the children of Paseah, the
children of Besai, 2:50 The children of Asnah, the children of
Mehunim, the children of Nephusim, 2:51 The children of Bakbuk, the
children of Hakupha, the children of Harhur, 2:52 The children of
Bazluth, the children of Mehida, the children of Harsha, 2:53 The
children of Barkos, the children of Sisera, the children of Thamah,
2:54 The children of Neziah, the children of Hatipha. 2:55 The children of Solomon's servants: the children of Sotai, the
children of Sophereth, the children of Peruda, 2:56 The children of
Jaalah, the children of Darkon, the children of Giddel, 2:57 The
children of Shephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of
Pochereth of Zebaim, the children of Ami. 2:58 All the Nethinims, and the children of Solomon's servants, were
three hundred ninety and two. 2:59 And these were they which went up from Telmelah, Telharsa,
Cherub, Addan, and Immer: but they could not shew their father's
house, and their seed, whether they were of Israel: 2:60 The children
of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, the children of Nekoda, six
hundred fifty and two. 2:61 And of the children of the priests: the children of Habaiah, the
children of Koz, the children of Barzillai; which took a wife of the
daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name:
2:62 These sought their register among those that were reckoned by
genealogy, but they were not found: therefore were they, as polluted,
put from the priesthood. 2:63 And the Tirshatha said unto them, that they should not eat of the
most holy things, till there stood up a priest with Urim and with
Thummim. 2:64 The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three
hundred and threescore, 2:65 Beside their servants and their maids, of
whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty and seven: and
there were among them two hundred singing men and singing women. 2:66 Their horses were seven hundred thirty and six; their mules, two
hundred forty and five; 2:67 Their camels, four hundred thirty and
five; their asses, six thousand seven hundred and twenty. 2:68 And some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house
of the LORD which is at Jerusalem, offered freely for the house of God
to set it up in his place: 2:69 They gave after their ability unto the
treasure of the work threescore and one thousand drams of gold, and
five thousand pound of silver, and one hundred priests' garments. 2:70 So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the
singers, and the porters, and the Nethinims, dwelt in their cities,
and all Israel in their cities. 3:1 And when the seventh month was come, and the children of Israel
were in the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man
to Jerusalem. 3:2 Then stood up Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brethren the
priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and his brethren, and
builded the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings
thereon, as it is written in the law of Moses the man of God. 3:3 And they set the altar upon his bases; for fear was upon them
because of the people of those countries: and they offered burnt
offerings thereon unto the LORD, even burnt offerings morning and
evening. 3:4 They kept also the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and
offered the daily burnt offerings by number, according to the custom,
as the duty of every day required; 3:5 And afterward offered the
continual burnt offering, both of the new moons, and of all the set
feasts of the LORD that were consecrated, and of every one that
willingly offered a freewill offering unto the LORD. 3:6 From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt
offerings unto the LORD. But the foundation of the temple of the LORD
was not yet laid. 3:7 They gave money also unto the masons, and to the carpenters; and
meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of Zidon, and to them of Tyre, to
bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of Joppa, according to the
grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia. 3:8 Now in the second year of their coming unto the house of God at
Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,
and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the
priests and the Levites, and all they that were come out of the
captivity unto Jerusalem; and appointed the Levites, from twenty years
old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the LORD. 3:9 Then stood Jeshua with his sons and his brethren, Kadmiel and his
sons, the sons of Judah, together, to set forward the workmen in the
house of God: the sons of Henadad, with their sons and their brethren
the Levites. 3:10 And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of the
LORD, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the
Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise the LORD, after the
ordinance of David king of Israel. 3:11 And they sang together by course in praising and giving thanks
unto the LORD; because he is good, for his mercy endureth for ever
toward Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised the
LORD, because the foundation of the house of the LORD was laid. 3:12 But many of the priests and Levites and chief of the fathers, who
were ancient men, that had seen the first house, when the foundation
of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice; and
many shouted aloud for joy: 3:13 So that the people could not discern
the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the
people: for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the noise was
heard afar off. 4:1 Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the
children of the captivity builded the temple unto the LORD God of
Israel; 4:2 Then they came to Zerubbabel, and to the chief of the
fathers, and said unto them, Let us build with you: for we seek your
God, as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto him since the days of
Esarhaddon king of Assur, which brought us up hither. 4:3 But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the chief of the
fathers of Israel, said unto them, Ye have nothing to do with us to
build an house unto our God; but we ourselves together will build unto
the LORD God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia hath
commanded us. 4:4 Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of
Judah, and troubled them in building, 4:5 And hired counsellors
against them, to frustrate their purpose, all the days of Cyrus king
of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia. 4:6 And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign,
wrote they unto him an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and
Jerusalem. 4:7 And in the days of Artaxerxes wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel,
and the rest of their companions, unto Artaxerxes king of Persia; and
the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and
interpreted in the Syrian tongue. 4:8 Rehum the chancellor and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter
against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort: 4:9 Then wrote
Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their
companions; the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the
Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the
Dehavites, and the Elamites, 4:10 And the rest of the nations whom the
great and noble Asnapper brought over, and set in the cities of
Samaria, and the rest that are on this side the river, and at such a
time. 4:11 This is the copy of the letter that they sent unto him, even unto
Artaxerxes the king; Thy servants the men on this side the river, and
at such a time. 4:12 Be it known unto the king, that the Jews which came up from thee
to us are come unto Jerusalem, building the rebellious and the bad
city, and have set up the walls thereof, and joined the foundations. 4:13 Be it known now unto the king, that, if this city be builded, and
the walls set up again, then will they not pay toll, tribute, and
custom, and so thou shalt endamage the revenue of the kings. 4:14 Now because we have maintenance from the king's palace, and it
was not meet for us to see the king's dishonour, therefore have we
sent and certified the king; 4:15 That search may be made in the book
of the records of thy fathers: so shalt thou find in the book of the
records, and know that this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful
unto kings and provinces, and that they have moved sedition within the
same of old time: for which cause was this city destroyed. 4:16 We certify the king that, if this city be builded again, and the
walls thereof set up, by this means thou shalt have no portion on this
side the river. 4:17 Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor, and to
Shimshai the scribe, and to the rest of their companions that dwell in
Samaria, and unto the rest beyond the river, Peace, and at such a
time. 4:18 The letter which ye sent unto us hath been plainly read before
me. 4:19 And I commanded, and search hath been made, and it is found that
this city of old time hath made insurrection against kings, and that
rebellion and sedition have been made therein. 4:20 There have been mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have
ruled over all countries beyond the river; and toll, tribute, and
custom, was paid unto them. 4:21 Give ye now commandment to cause these men to cease, and that
this city be not builded, until another commandment shall be given
from me. 4:22 Take heed now that ye fail not to do this: why should damage grow
to the hurt of the kings? 4:23 Now when the copy of king Artaxerxes'
letter was read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their
companions, they went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews, and made
them to cease by force and power. 4:24 Then ceased the work of the house of God which is at Jerusalem. So it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of
Persia. 5:1 Then the prophets, Haggai the prophet, and Zechariah the son of
Iddo, prophesied unto the Jews that were in Judah and Jerusalem in the
name of the God of Israel, even unto them. 5:2 Then rose up Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son
of Jozadak, and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem:
and with them were the prophets of God helping them. 5:3 At the same time came to them Tatnai, governor on this side the
river, and Shetharboznai and their companions, and said thus unto
them, Who hath commanded you to build this house, and to make up this
wall? 5:4 Then said we unto them after this manner, What are the
names of the men that make this building? 5:5 But the eye of their
God was upon the elders of the Jews, that they could not cause them to
cease, till the matter came to Darius: and then they returned answer
by letter concerning this matter. 5:6 The copy of the letter that Tatnai, governor on this side the
river, and Shetharboznai and his companions the Apharsachites, which
were on this side the river, sent unto Darius the king: 5:7 They sent
a letter unto him, wherein was written thus; Unto Darius the king, all
peace. 5:8 Be it known unto the king, that we went into the province of
Judea, to the house of the great God, which is builded with great
stones, and timber is laid in the walls, and this work goeth fast on,
and prospereth in their hands. 5:9 Then asked we those elders, and said unto them thus, Who commanded
you to build this house, and to make up these walls? 5:10 We asked
their names also, to certify thee, that we might write the names of
the men that were the chief of them. 5:11 And thus they returned us answer, saying, We are the servants of
the God of heaven and earth, and build the house that was builded
these many years ago, which a great king of Israel builded and set up. 5:12 But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven unto
wrath, he gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried the
people away into Babylon. 5:13 But in the first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon the same king
Cyrus made a decree to build this house of God. 5:14 And the vessels also of gold and silver of the house of God,
which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that was in Jerusalem, and
brought them into the temple of Babylon, those did Cyrus the king take
out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered unto one, whose
name was Sheshbazzar, whom he had made governor; 5:15 And said unto
him, Take these vessels, go, carry them into the temple that is in
Jerusalem, and let the house of God be builded in his place. 5:16 Then came the same Sheshbazzar, and laid the foundation of the
house of God which is in Jerusalem: and since that time even until now
hath it been in building, and yet it is not finished. 5:17 Now therefore, if it seem good to the king, let there be search
made in the king's treasure house, which is there at Babylon, whether
it be so, that a decree was made of Cyrus the king to build this house
of God at Jerusalem, and let the king send his pleasure to us
concerning this matter. 6:1 Then Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the
house of the rolls, where the treasures were laid up in Babylon. 6:2 And there was found at Achmetha, in the palace that is in the
province of the Medes, a roll, and therein was a record thus written:
6:3 In the first year of Cyrus the king the same Cyrus the king made a
decree concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, Let the house be
builded, the place where they offered sacrifices, and let the
foundations thereof be strongly laid; the height thereof threescore
cubits, and the breadth thereof threescore cubits; 6:4 With three rows
of great stones, and a row of new timber: and let the expenses be
given out of the king's house: 6:5 And also let the golden and silver
vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of
the temple which is at Jerusalem, and brought unto Babylon, be
restored, and brought again unto the temple which is at Jerusalem,
every one to his place, and place them in the house of God.