"What's this? What's this?" the little Jackal said. "I think I'll
investigate a little!" So he stood quite still and began to talk to himself (you remember, it
was a little way he had), but loudly. He said,--

"How strange that my little House doesn't speak to me! Why don't you
speak to me, little House? You always speak to me, if everything is all
right, when I come home. I wonder if anything is wrong with my little
House?" The old Alligator thought to himself that he must certainly pretend to
be the little House, or the little Jackal would never come in. So he put
on as pleasant a voice as he could (which is not saying much) and
said,--

"Hullo, little Jackal!" Oh! When the little Jackal heard that, he was frightened enough, for
once. "It's the old Alligator," he said, "and if I don't make an end of him
this time he will certainly make an end of me. What shall I do?" He thought very fast. Then he spoke out pleasantly. "Thank you, little House," he said, "it's good to hear your pretty
voice, dear little House, and I will be in with you in a minute; only
first I must gather some firewood for dinner." Then he went and gathered firewood, and more firewood, and more
firewood; and he piled it all up solid against the door and round the
house; and then he set fire to it! And it smoked and burned till it smoked that old Alligator to smoked
herring! THE LARKS IN THE CORNFIELD


There was once a family of little Larks who lived with their mother in a
nest in a cornfield. When the corn was ripe the mother Lark watched very
carefully to see if there were any sign of the reapers' coming, for she
knew that when they came their sharp knives would cut down the nest and
hurt the baby Larks. So every day, when she went out for food, she told
the little Larks to look and listen very closely to everything that
went on, and to tell her all they saw and heard when she came home. One day when she came home the little Larks were much frightened. "Oh, Mother, dear Mother," they said, "you must move us away to-night! The farmer was in the field to-day, and he said, 'The corn is ready to
cut; we must call in the neighbours to help.' And then he told his son
to go out to-night and ask all the neighbours to come and reap the corn
to-morrow." The mother Lark laughed. "Don't be frightened," she said; "if he waits
for his neighbours to reap the corn we shall have plenty of time to
move; tell me what he says to-morrow." The next night the little Larks were quite trembling with fear; the
moment their mother got home they cried out, "Mother, you must surely
move us to-night! The farmer came to-day and said, 'The corn is getting
too ripe; we cannot wait for our neighbours; we must ask our relatives
to help us.' And then he called his son and told him to ask all the
uncles and cousins to come to-morrow and cut the corn. Shall we not move
to-night?" "Don't worry," said the mother Lark; "the uncles and cousins have plenty
of reaping to do for themselves; we'll not move yet." The third night, when the mother Lark came home, the baby Larks said,
"Mother, dear, the farmer came to the field to-day, and when he looked
at the corn he was quite angry; he said, 'This will never do! The corn
is getting too ripe; it's no use to wait for our relatives, we shall
have to cut this corn ourselves.' And then he called his son and said,
'Go out to-night and hire reapers, and to-morrow we will begin to cut.'" "Well," said the mother, "that is another story; when a man begins to do
his own business, instead of asking somebody else to do it, things get
done. I will move you out to-night." A TRUE STORY ABOUT A GIRL


Once there were four little girls who lived in a big, bare house, in the
country. They were very poor, but they had the happiest times you ever
heard of, because they were very rich in everything except money. They
had a wonderful, wise father, who knew stories to tell, and who taught
them their lessons in such a beautiful way that it was better than play;
they had a lovely, merry, kind mother, who was never too tired to help
them work or watch them play; and they had all the great green country
to play in. There were dark, shadowy woods, and fields of flowers, and a
river. And there was a big barn. One of the little girls was named Louisa. She was very pretty, and ever
so strong; she could run for miles through the woods and not get tired. She had a splendid brain in her little head; it liked study, and it
thought interesting thoughts all day long. Louisa liked to sit in a corner by herself, sometimes, and write
thoughts in her diary; all the little girls kept diaries. She liked to
make up stories out of her own head, and sometimes she made verses. When the four little sisters had finished their lessons, and had helped
their mother wash up and sew, they used to go to the big barn to play;
and the best play of all was theatricals. Louisa liked theatricals
better than anything. They made the barn into a theatre, and the grown-up people came to see
the plays they acted. They used to climb up on the hay-loft for a stage,
and the grown people sat in chairs on the floor. It was great fun. One
of the plays they acted was _Jack and the Beanstalk_. They had a ladder
from the floor to the loft, and on the ladder they tied a vine all the
way up to the loft, to look like the wonderful beanstalk. One of the
little girls was dressed up to look like Jack, and she acted that part. When it came to the place in the story where the giant tried to follow
Jack, the little girl cut down the beanstalk, and down came the giant
tumbling from the loft. The giant was made out of pillows, with a great,
fierce head of paper, and funny clothes. Another story that they acted was _Cinderella_. They made a wonderful
big pumpkin out of the wheelbarrow, trimmed with yellow paper, and
Cinderella rolled away in it, when the fairy godmother waved her wand. One other beautiful story they used to play. It was the story of
_Pilgrim's Progress_; if you have never heard it, you must be sure to
read it as soon as you can read well enough to understand the
old-fashioned words. The little girls used to put shells in their hats
for a sign they were on a pilgrimage, as the old pilgrims used to do;
then they made journeys over the hill behind the house, and through the
woods, and down the lanes; and when the pilgrimage was over they had
apples and nuts to eat, in the happy land of home. Louisa loved all these plays, and she made some of her own and wrote
them down so that the children could act them. But better than fun or writing Louisa loved her mother, and by and by,
as the little girl began to grow into a big girl, she felt very sad to
see her dear mother work so hard. She helped all she could with the
housework, but nothing could really help the tired mother except money;
she needed money for food and clothes, and someone grown up, to help in
the house. But there never was enough money for these things, and
Louisa's mother grew more and more weary, and sometimes ill. I cannot
tell you how much Louisa suffered over this. At last, as Louisa thought about it, she came to care more about helping
her mother and her father and her sisters than about anything else in
all the world. And she began to work very hard to earn money. She sewed
for people, and when she was a little older she taught some little girls
their lessons, and then she wrote stories for the papers. Every bit of
money she earned, except what she had to use, she gave to her dear
family. It helped very much, but it was so little that Louisa never felt
as if she were doing anything. Every year she grew more unselfish, and every year she worked harder. She liked writing stories best of all her work, but she did not get much
money for them, and some people told her she was wasting her time. At last, one day, a publisher asked Louisa, who was now a woman, to
write a book for girls. Louisa was not very well, and she was very
tired, but she always said, "I'll try," when she had a chance to work;
so she said, "I'll try," to the publisher. When she thought about the
book she remembered the good times she used to have with her sisters in
the big, bare house in the country. And so she wrote a story and put all
that in it; she put her dear mother and her wise father in it, and all
the little sisters, and besides the jolly times and the plays, she put
the sad, hard times in,--the work and worry and going without things. When the book was written, she called it _Little Women_, and sent it to
the publisher. And, children, the little book made Louisa famous. It was so sweet and
funny and sad and real,--like our own lives,--that everybody wanted to
read it. Everybody bought it, and much money came from it. After so many
years, little Louisa's wish came true: she bought a nice house for her
family; she sent one of her sisters to Europe, to study; she gave her
father books; but best of all, she was able to see to it that the
beloved mother, so tired and so ill, could have rest and happiness. Never again did the dear mother have to do any hard work, and she had
pretty things about her all the rest of her life. Louisa Alcott, for that was Louisa's name, wrote many beautiful books
after this, and she became one of the most famous women of America. But
I think the most beautiful thing about her is what I have been telling
you: that she loved her mother so well that she gave her whole life to
make her happy. MY KINGDOM


The little Louisa I told you about, who wrote verses and stories in her
diary, used to like to play that she was a princess, and that her
kingdom was her own mind. When she had unkind or dissatisfied thoughts,
she tried to get rid of them by playing they were enemies of the
kingdom; and she drove them out with soldiers; the soldiers were
patience, duty, and love. It used to help Louisa to be good to play
this, and I think it may have helped make her the splendid woman she was
afterward. Maybe you would like to hear a poem she wrote about it, when
she was only fourteen years old. It will help you, too, to think the
same thoughts. A little kingdom I possess,
       Where thoughts and feelings dwell,
     And very hard I find the task
       Of governing it well;
     For passion tempts and troubles me,
       A wayward will misleads,
     And selfishness its shadow casts
       On all my words and deeds. How can I learn to rule myself,
       To be the child I should,
     Honest and brave, nor ever tire
       Of trying to be good? How can I keep a sunny soul
       To shine along life's way? How can I tune my little heart
       To sweetly sing all day? Dear Father, help me with the love
       That casteth out my fear,
     Teach me to lean on Thee, and feel
       That Thou art very near,
     That no temptation is unseen,
       No childish grief too small,
     Since Thou, with patience infinite,
       Doth soothe and comfort all. I do not ask for any crown
       But that which all may win,
     Nor seek to conquer any world,
       Except the one within. Be Thou my Guide until I find,
       Led by a tender hand,
     Thy happy kingdom in _myself_,
       And dare to take command.