8:6 That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for a
pair of shoes; yea, and sell the refuse of the wheat? 8:7 The LORD
hath sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any
of their works. 8:8 Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one mourn that
dwelleth therein? and it shall rise up wholly as a flood; and it shall
be cast out and drowned, as by the flood of Egypt. 8:9 And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord GOD, that I
will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in
the clear day: 8:10 And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all
your songs into lamentation; and I will bring up sackcloth upon all
loins, and baldness upon every head; and I will make it as the
mourning of an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day. 8:11 Behold, the days come, saith the Lord GOD, that I will send a
famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but
of hearing the words of the LORD: 8:12 And they shall wander from sea
to sea, and from the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro
to seek the word of the LORD, and shall not find it. 8:13 In that day shall the fair virgins and young men faint for
thirst. 8:14 They that swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, Thy god, O Dan,
liveth; and, The manner of Beersheba liveth; even they shall fall, and
never rise up again. 9:1 I saw the LORD standing upon the altar: and he said, Smite the
lintel of the door, that the posts may shake: and cut them in the
head, all of them; and I will slay the last of them with the sword: he
that fleeth of them shall not flee away, and he that escapeth of them
shall not be delivered. 9:2 Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them;
though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down: 9:3 And
though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel, I will search and
take them out thence; and though they be hid from my sight in the
bottom of the sea, thence will I command the serpent, and he shall
bite them: 9:4 And though they go into captivity before their enemies,
thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay them: and I will
set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good. 9:5 And the Lord GOD of hosts is he that toucheth the land, and it
shall melt, and all that dwell therein shall mourn: and it shall rise
up wholly like a flood; and shall be drowned, as by the flood of
Egypt. 9:6 It is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven, and hath founded
his troop in the earth; he that calleth for the waters of the sea, and
poureth them out upon the face of the earth: The LORD is his name. 9:7 Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of
Israel? saith the LORD. Have not I brought up Israel out of the land
of Egypt? and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir? 9:8 Behold, the eyes of the Lord GOD are upon the sinful kingdom, and
I will destroy it from off the face of the earth; saving that I will
not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the LORD. 9:9 For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among
all nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not the
least grain fall upon the earth. 9:10 All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say,
The evil shall not overtake nor prevent us. 9:11 In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is
fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up his
ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old: 9:12 That they may
possess the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen, which are called
by my name, saith the LORD that doeth this. 9:13 Behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that the plowman shall
overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed;
and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt. 9:14 And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel, and
they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; and they shall
plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall also make
gardens, and eat the fruit of them. 9:15 And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be
pulled up out of their land which I have given them, saith the LORD
thy God. Obadiah


1:1 The vision of Obadiah. Thus saith the Lord GOD concerning Edom;
We have heard a rumour from the LORD, and an ambassador is sent among
the heathen, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle. 1:2 Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly
despised. 1:3 The pride of thine heart hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in
the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high; that saith in his
heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground? 1:4 Though thou exalt
thyself as the eagle, and though thou set thy nest among the stars,
thence will I bring thee down, saith the LORD. 1:5 If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night, (how art thou cut
off!) would they not have stolen till they had enough? if the
grapegatherers came to thee, would they not leave some grapes? 1:6
How are the things of Esau searched out! how are his hidden things
sought up! 1:7 All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee even
to the border: the men that were at peace with thee have deceived
thee, and prevailed against thee; that they eat thy bread have laid a
wound under thee: there is none understanding in him. 1:8 Shall I not in that day, saith the LORD, even destroy the wise men
out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau? 1:9 And thy
mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that every one of
the mount of Esau may be cut off by slaughter. 1:10 For thy violence against thy brother Jacob shame shall cover
thee, and thou shalt be cut off for ever. 1:11 In the day that thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that
the strangers carried away captive his forces, and foreigners entered
into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou wast as one of
them. 1:12 But thou shouldest not have looked on the day of thy brother in
the day that he became a stranger; neither shouldest thou have
rejoiced over the children of Judah in the day of their destruction;
neither shouldest thou have spoken proudly in the day of distress. 1:13 Thou shouldest not have entered into the gate of my people in the
day of their calamity; yea, thou shouldest not have looked on their
affliction in the day of their calamity, nor have laid hands on their
substance in the day of their calamity; 1:14 Neither shouldest thou
have stood in the crossway, to cut off those of his that did escape;
neither shouldest thou have delivered up those of his that did remain
in the day of distress. 1:15 For the day of the LORD is near upon all the heathen: as thou
hast done, it shall be done unto thee: thy reward shall return upon
thine own head. 1:16 For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the
heathen drink continually, yea, they shall drink, and they shall
swallow down, and they shall be as though they had not been. 1:17 But upon mount Zion shall be deliverance, and there shall be
holiness; and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions. 1:18 And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a
flame, and the house of Esau for stubble, and they shall kindle in
them, and devour them; and there shall not be any remaining of the
house of Esau; for the LORD hath spoken it. 1:19 And they of the south shall possess the mount of Esau; and they
of the plain the Philistines: and they shall possess the fields of
Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria: and Benjamin shall possess Gilead. 1:20 And the captivity of this host of the children of Israel shall
possess that of the Canaanites, even unto Zarephath; and the captivity
of Jerusalem, which is in Sepharad, shall possess the cities of the
south. 1:21 And saviours shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of
Esau; and the kingdom shall be the LORD's. Jonah


1:1 Now the word of the LORD came unto Jonah the son of Amittai,
saying, 1:2 Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it;
for their wickedness is come up before me. 1:3 But Jonah rose up to flee unto Tarshish from the presence of the
LORD, and went down to Joppa; and he found a ship going to Tarshish:
so he paid the fare thereof, and went down into it, to go with them
unto Tarshish from the presence of the LORD. 1:4 But the LORD sent out a great wind into the sea, and there was a
mighty tempest in the sea, so that the ship was like to be broken. 1:5 Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man unto his god,
and cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to
lighten it of them. But Jonah was gone down into the sides of the
ship; and he lay, and was fast asleep. 1:6 So the shipmaster came to him, and said unto him, What meanest
thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will
think upon us, that we perish not. 1:7 And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots,
that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast
lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah. 1:8 Then said they unto him, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause
this evil is upon us; What is thine occupation? and whence comest
thou? what is thy country? and of what people art thou? 1:9 And he
said unto them, I am an Hebrew; and I fear the LORD, the God of
heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land. 1:10 Then were the men exceedingly afraid, and said unto him. Why hast
thou done this? For the men knew that he fled from the presence of the
LORD, because he had told them. 1:11 Then said they unto him, What shall we do unto thee, that the sea
may be calm unto us? for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous. 1:12 And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the
sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake
this great tempest is upon you. 1:13 Nevertheless the men rowed hard to bring it to the land; but they
could not: for the sea wrought, and was tempestuous against them. 1:14 Wherefore they cried unto the LORD, and said, We beseech thee, O
LORD, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man's life, and lay
not upon us innocent blood: for thou, O LORD, hast done as it pleased
thee. 1:15 So they look up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea: and the
sea ceased from her raging. 1:16 Then the men feared the LORD exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice
unto the LORD, and made vows. 1:17 Now the LORD had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. And
Jonah was in the belly of the fish three days and three nights. 2:1 Then Jonah prayed unto the LORD his God out of the fish's belly,
2:2 And said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the LORD, and
he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my
voice. 2:3 For thou hadst cast me into the deep, in the midst of the seas;
and the floods compassed me about: all thy billows and thy waves
passed over me. 2:4 Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look again
toward thy holy temple. 2:5 The waters compassed me about, even to the soul: the depth closed
me round about, the weeds were wrapped about my head. 2:6 I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; the earth with her
bars was about me for ever: yet hast thou brought up my life from
corruption, O LORD my God. 2:7 When my soul fainted within me I remembered the LORD: and my
prayer came in unto thee, into thine holy temple. 2:8 They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy. 2:9 But I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I
will pay that that I have vowed. Salvation is of the LORD. 2:10 And the LORD spake unto the fish, and it vomited out Jonah upon
the dry land. 3:1 And the word of the LORD came unto Jonah the second time, saying,
3:2 Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the
preaching that I bid thee. 3:3 So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of
the LORD. Now Nineveh was an exceeding great city of three days'
journey. 3:4 And Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey, and he
cried, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown. 3:5 So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and
put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them. 3:6 For word came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his
throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth,
and sat in ashes. 3:7 And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh by
the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor
beast, herd nor flock, taste any thing: let them not feed, nor drink
water: 3:8 But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth, and cry
mightily unto God: yea, let them turn every one from his evil way, and
from the violence that is in their hands. 3:9 Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his
fierce anger, that we perish not? 3:10 And God saw their works, that
they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that he
had said that he would do unto them; and he did it not. 4:1 But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was very angry. 4:2 And he prayed unto the LORD, and said, I pray thee, O LORD, was
not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I fled
before unto Tarshish: for I knew that thou art a gracious God, and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of
the evil. 4:3 Therefore now, O LORD, take, I beseech thee, my life from me; for
it is better for me to die than to live. 4:4 Then said the LORD, Doest thou well to be angry? 4:5 So Jonah
went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there
made him a booth, and sat under it in the shadow, till he might see
what would become of the city. 4:6 And the LORD God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over
Jonah, that it might be a shadow over his head, to deliver him from
his grief. So Jonah was exceeding glad of the gourd.