And then there was his
tail, that funny little tail he is so fond of jerking when he scolds. This helped him too. It helped him keep his balance and keep from
turning over and over. Down, down, down he sailed and landed on his feet. Of course, he hit the
ground pretty hard, and for just a second he quite lost his breath. But
it was only for a second, and then he was scurrying off as fast as a
frightened Squirrel could. Buster Bear watched him and grinned. "I didn't catch him that time," he growled, "but I guess I gave him a
good fright and taught him a lesson." XVII

BUSTER BEAR GOES BERRYING


Buster Bear is a great hand to talk to himself when he thinks no one is
around to overhear. It's a habit. However, it isn't a bad habit unless
it is carried too far. Any habit becomes bad, if it is carried too far. Suppose you had a secret, a real secret, something that nobody else knew
and that you didn't want anybody else to know. And suppose you had the
habit of talking to yourself. You might, without thinking, you know,
tell that secret out loud to yourself, and some one might, just might
happen to overhear! Then there wouldn't be any secret. That is the way
that a habit which isn't bad in itself can become bad when it is
carried too far. Now Buster Bear had lived by himself in the Great Woods so long that
this habit of talking to himself had grown and grown. He did it just to
keep from being lonesome. Of course, when he came down to the Green
Forest to live, he brought all his habits with him. That is one thing
about habits,--you always take them with you wherever you go. So Buster
brought this habit of talking to himself down to the Green Forest, where
he had many more neighbors than he had in the Great Woods. "Let me see, let me see, what is there to tempt my appetite?" said
Buster in his deep, grumbly-rumbly voice. "I find my appetite isn't what
it ought to be. I need a change. Yes, Sir, I need a change. There is
something I ought to have at this time of year, and I haven't got it. There is something that I used to have and don't have now. Ha! I know! I
need some fresh fruit. That's it--fresh fruit! It must be about berry
time now, and I'd forgotten all about it. My, my, my, how good some
berries would taste! Now if I were back up there in the Great Woods I
could have all I could eat. Um-m-m-m! Makes my mouth water just to think
of it. There ought to be some up in the Old Pasture. There ought to be a
lot of 'em up there. If I wasn't afraid that some one would see me, I'd
go up there." Buster sighed. Then he sighed again. The more he thought about those
berries he felt sure were growing in the Old Pasture, the more he wanted
some. It seemed to him that never in all his life had he wanted berries
as he did now. He wandered about uneasily. He was hungry--hungry for
berries and nothing else. By and by he began talking to himself again. "If I wasn't afraid of being seen, I'd go up to the Old Pasture this
very minute. Seems as if I could taste those berries." He licked his
lips hungrily as he spoke. Then his face brightened. "I know what I'll
do! I'll go up there at the very first peep of day to-morrow. I can eat
all I want and get back to the Green Forest before there is any danger
that Farmer Brown's boy or any one else I'm afraid of will see me. That's just what I'll do. My, I wish to-morrow morning would hurry up
and come." Now though Buster didn't know it, some one had been listening, and that
some one was none other than Sammy Jay. When at last Buster lay down
for a nap, Sammy flew away, chuckling to himself. "I believe I'll visit
the Old Pasture to-morrow morning myself," thought he. "I have an idea
that something interesting may happen if Buster doesn't change his
mind." Sammy was on the lookout very early the next morning. The first Jolly
Little Sunbeams had only reached the Green Meadows and had not started
to creep into the Green Forest, when he saw a big, dark form steal out
of the Green Forest where it joins the Old Pasture. It moved very
swiftly and silently, as if in a great hurry. Sammy knew who it was: it
was Buster Bear, and he was going berrying. Sammy waited a little until
he could see better. Then he too started for the Old Pasture. XVIII

SOMEBODY ELSE GOES BERRYING


Isn't it funny how two people will often think of the same thing at the
same time, and neither one know that the other is thinking of it? That
is just what happened the day that Buster Bear first thought of going
berrying. While he was walking around in the Green Forest, talking to
himself about how hungry he was for some berries and how sure he was
that there must be some up in the Old Pasture, some one else was
thinking about berries and about the Old Pasture too. "Will you make me a berry pie if I will get the berries to-morrow?" asked Farmer Brown's boy of his mother. Of course Mrs. Brown promised that she would, and so that night Farmer
Brown's boy went to bed very early that he might get up early in the
morning, and all night long he dreamed of berries and berry pies. He was
awake even before jolly, round, red Mr. Sun thought it was time to get
up, and he was all ready to start for the Old Pasture when the first
Jolly Little Sunbeams came dancing across the Green Meadows. He carried
a big tin pail, and in the bottom of it, wrapped up in a piece of paper,
was a lunch, for he meant to stay until he filled that pail, if it took
all day. Now the Old Pasture is very large. It lies at the foot of the Big
Mountain, and even extends a little way up on the Big Mountain. There is
room in it for many people to pick berries all day without even seeing
each other, unless they roam about a great deal. You see, the bushes
grow very thick there, and you cannot see very far in any direction. Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun had climbed a little way up in the sky by the
time Farmer Brown's boy reached the Old Pasture, and was smiling down on
all the Great World, and all the Great World seemed to be smiling back. Farmer Brown's boy started to whistle, and then he stopped. "If I whistle," thought he, "everybody will know just where I am, and
will keep out of sight, and I never can get acquainted with folks if
they keep out of sight." You see, Farmer Brown's boy was just beginning to understand something
that Peter Rabbit and the other little people of the Green Meadows and
the Green Forest learned almost as soon as they learned to walk,--that
if you don't want to be seen, you mustn't be heard. So he didn't
whistle as he felt like doing, and he tried not to make a bit of noise
as he followed an old cow-path towards a place where he knew the berries
grew thick and oh, so big, and all the time he kept his eyes wide open,
and he kept his ears open too. That is how he happened to hear a little cry, a very faint little cry. If he had been whistling, he wouldn't have heard it at all. He stopped
to listen. He never had heard a cry just like it before. At first he
couldn't make out just what it was or where it came from. But one thing
he was sure of, and that was that it was a cry of fright. He stood
perfectly still and listened with all his might. There it was
again--"Help! Help! Help"--and it was very faint and sounded terribly
frightened. He waited a minute or two, but heard nothing more. Then he
put down his pail and began a hurried look here, there, and everywhere. He was sure that it had come from somewhere on the ground, so he peered
behind bushes and peeped behind logs and stones, and then just as he had
about given up hope of finding where it came from, he went around a
little turn in the old cow-path, and there right in front of him was
little Mr. Gartersnake, and what do you think he was doing? Well, I
don't like to tell you, but he was trying to swallow one of the children
of Stickytoes the Tree Toad. Of course Farmer Brown's Boy didn't let
him. He made little Mr. Gartersnake set Master Stickytoes free and held
Mr. Gartersnake until Master Stickytoes was safely out of reach.