If you had
been an eighteenth-century sceptic you would have told me that I
ignore the kindness and benevolence of nature. You are an
atheist, and you praise the deists of the eighteenth century. Read them instead of praising them, and you will find that their
whole universe stands or falls with the deity. You are a
materialist, and you think Bruno a scientific hero. See what he
said and you will think him an insane mystic. No, the great
Free-thinker, with his genuine ability and honesty, does not in
practice destroy Christianity. What he does destroy is the
Free-thinker who went before. Free-thought may be suggestive, it
may be inspiriting, it may have as much as you please of the
merits that come from vivacity and variety. But there is one
thing Free-thought can never be by any possibility--Free-thought
can never be progressive. It can never be progressive because it
will accept nothing from the past; it begins every time again
from the beginning; and it goes every time in a different
direction. All the rational philosophers have gone along
different roads, so it is impossible to say which has gone
farthest. Who can discuss whether Emerson was a better optimist
than Schopenhauer was pessimist? It is like asking if this corn
is as yellow as that hill is steep. No; there are only two things
that really progress; and they both accept accumulations of
authority. They may be progressing uphill and down; they may be
growing steadily better or steadily worse; but they have steadily
increased in certain definable matters; they have steadily
advanced in a certain definable direction; they are the only two
things, it seems, that ever _can_ progress. The first is strictly
physical science. The second is the Catholic Church." "Physical science and the Catholic Church!" said Turnbull
sarcastically; "and no doubt the first owes a great deal to the
second." "If you pressed that point I might reply that it was very
probable," answered MacIan calmly. "I often fancy that your
historical generalizations rest frequently on random instances; I
should not be surprised if your vague notions of the Church as
the persecutor of science was a generalization from Galileo. I
should not be at all surprised if, when you counted the
scientific investigations and discoveries since the fall of Rome,
you found that a great mass of them had been made by monks. But
the matter is irrelevant to my meaning. I say that if you want an
example of anything which has progressed in the moral world by
the same method as science in the material world, by continually
adding to without unsettling what was there before, then I say
that there _is_ only one example of it. And that is Us." "With this enormous difference," said Turnbull, "that however
elaborate be the calculations of physical science, their net
result can be tested. Granted that it took millions of books I
never read and millions of men I never heard of to discover the
electric light. Still I can see the electric light. But I cannot
see the supreme virtue which is the result of all your theologies
and sacraments." "Catholic virtue is often invisible because it is the normal,"
answered MacIan. "Christianity is always out of fashion because
it is always sane; and all fashions are mild insanities. When
Italy is mad on art the Church seems too Puritanical; when
England is mad on Puritanism the Church seems too artistic. When
you quarrel with us now you class us with kingship and despotism;
but when you quarrelled with us first it was because we would not
accept the divine despotism of Henry VIII. The Church always
seems to be behind the times, when it is really beyond the times;
it is waiting till the last fad shall have seen its last summer. It keeps the key of a permanent virtue." "Oh, I have heard all that!" said Turnbull with genial contempt. "I have heard that Christianity keeps the key of virtue, and that
if you read Tom Paine you will cut your throat at Monte Carlo. It
is such rubbish that I am not even angry at it. You say that
Christianity is the prop of morals; but what more do you do? When
a doctor attends you and could poison you with a pinch of salt,
do you ask whether he is a Christian? You ask whether he is a
gentleman, whether he is an M.D.--anything but that. When a
soldier enlists to die for his country or disgrace it, do you ask
whether he is a Christian? You are more likely to ask whether he
is Oxford or Cambridge at the boat race. If you think your creed
essential to morals why do you not make it a test for these
things?" "We once did make it a test for these things," said MacIan
smiling, "and then you told us that we were imposing by force a
faith unsupported by argument. It seems rather hard that having
first been told that our creed must be false because we did use
tests, we should now be told that it must be false because we
don't. But I notice that most anti-Christian arguments are in the
same inconsistent style." "That is all very well as a debating-club answer," replied
Turnbull good-humouredly, "but the question still remains: Why
don't you confine yourself more to Christians if Christians are
the only really good men?" "Who talked of such folly?" asked MacIan disdainfully. "Do you
suppose that the Catholic Church ever held that Christians were
the only good men? Why, the Catholics of the Catholic Middle Ages
talked about the virtues of all the virtuous Pagans until
humanity was sick of the subject. No, if you really want to know
what we mean when we say that Christianity has a special power of
virtue, I will tell you. The Church is the only thing on earth
that can perpetuate a type of virtue and make it something more
than a fashion. The thing is so plain and historical that I
hardly think you will ever deny it. You cannot deny that it is
perfectly possible that tomorrow morning, in Ireland or in Italy,
there might appear a man not only as good but good in exactly the
same way as St. Francis of Assisi. Very well, now take the other
types of human virtue; many of them splendid. The English
gentleman of Elizabeth was chivalrous and idealistic. But can you
stand still here in this meadow and _be_ an English gentleman of
Elizabeth? The austere republican of the eighteenth century, with
his stern patriotism and his simple life, was a fine fellow. But
have you ever seen him? have you ever seen an austere republican? Only a hundred years have passed and that volcano of
revolutionary truth and valour is as cold as the mountains of the
moon. And so it is and so it will be with the ethics which are
buzzing down Fleet Street at this instant as I speak. What phrase
would inspire the London clerk or workman just now? Perhaps that
he is a son of the British Empire on which the sun never sets;
perhaps that he is a prop of his Trades Union, or a
class-conscious proletarian something or other; perhaps merely
that he is a gentleman when he obviously is not. Those names and
notions are all honourable; but how long will they last? Empires
break; industrial conditions change; the suburbs will not last
for ever. What will remain? I will tell you. The Catholic Saint
will remain." "And suppose I don't like him?" said Turnbull. "On my theory the question is rather whether he will like you: or
more probably whether he will ever have heard of you. But I grant
the reasonableness of your query. You have a right, if you speak
as the ordinary man, to ask if you will like the saint. But as
the ordinary man you do like him. You revel in him. If you
dislike him it is not because you are a nice ordinary man, but
because you are (if you will excuse me) a sophisticated prig of a
Fleet Street editor. That is just the funny part of it. The human
race has always admired the Catholic virtues, however little it
can practise them; and oddly enough it has admired most those of
them that the modern world most sharply disputes. You complain of
Catholicism for setting up an ideal of virginity; it did nothing
of the kind. The whole human race set up an ideal of virginity;
the Greeks in Athene, the Romans in the Vestal fire, set up an
ideal of virginity. What then is your real quarrel with
Catholicism? Your quarrel can only be, your quarrel really only
is, that Catholicism has _achieved_ an ideal of virginity; that
it is no longer a mere piece of floating poetry. But if you, and
a few feverish men, in top hats, running about in a street in
London, choose to differ as to the ideal itself, not only from
the Church, but from the Parthenon whose name means virginity,
from the Roman Empire which went outwards from the virgin flame,
from the whole legend and tradition of Europe, from the lion who
will not touch virgins, from the unicorn who respects them, and
who make up together the bearers of your own national shield,
from the most living and lawless of your own poets, from
Massinger, who wrote the _Virgin Martyr_, from Shakespeare, who
wrote _Measure for Measure_--if you in Fleet Street differ from
all this human experience, does it never strike you that it may
be Fleet Street that is wrong?" "No," answered Turnbull; "I trust that I am sufficiently
fair-minded to canvass and consider the idea; but having
considered it, I think Fleet Street is right, yes--even if the
Parthenon is wrong. I think that as the world goes on new
psychological atmospheres are generated, and in these atmospheres
it is possible to find delicacies and combinations which in other
times would have to be represented by some ruder symbol. Every
man feels the need of some element of purity in sex; perhaps they
can only typify purity as the absence of sex. You will laugh if I
suggest that we may have made in Fleet Street an atmosphere in
which a man can be so passionate as Sir Lancelot and as pure as
Sir Galahad. But, after all, we have in the modern world erected
many such atmospheres. We have, for instance, a new and
imaginative appreciation of children." "Quite so," replied MacIan with a singular smile. "It has been
very well put by one of the brightest of your young authors, who
said: 'Unless you become as little children ye shall in no wise
enter the kingdom of heaven.' But you are quite right; there is a
modern worship of children. And what, I ask you, is this modern
worship of children? What, in the name of all the angels and
devils, is it except a worship of virginity? Why should anyone
worship a thing merely because it is small or immature? No; you
have tried to escape from this thing, and the very thing you
point to as the goal of your escape is only the thing again.