You have nothing to do but to make over the lease
to me. I make all safe to you with my bond. Now, being in possession, I
come forward in my own proper person. SHALL I PROCEED?" "No--you have said enough," replied Sir Arthur. "The case, indeed, lies in a nutshell," said the attorney, who had by
this time worked himself up to such a pitch of professional enthusiasm,
that, intent upon his vision of a lawsuit, he totally forgot to observe
the impression his words made upon Sir Arthur. "There's only one thing we have forgotten all this time," said Sir
Arthur. "What can that be, sir?" "That we shall ruin this poor man." Case was thunderstruck at these words, or rather, by the look which
accompanied them. He recollected that he had laid himself open before he
was sure of Sir Arthur's REAL character. He softened, and said he should
have had certainly more CONSIDERATION in the case of any but a litigious,
pig-headed fellow, as he knew Price to be. "If he be litigious," said Sir Arthur, "I shall certainly be glad to get
him fairly out of the parish as soon as possible. When you go home, you
will be so good, sir, as to send me his lease, that I may satisfy myself
before we stir in this business." The attorney, brightening up, prepared to take leave; but he could not
persuade himself to take his departure without making one push at Sir
Arthur about the agency. "I will not trouble you, Sir Arthur, with this lease of Price's," said
Case; "I'll leave it with your agent. Whom shall I apply to?" "TO MYSELF, sir, if you please," replied Sir Arthur. The courtiers of Louis the Fourteenth could not have looked more
astounded than our attorney, when they received from their monarch a
similar answer. It was this unexpected reply of Sir Arthur's which had
deranged the temper of Mr. Case, and caused his wig to stand so crooked
upon his forehead, and which had rendered him impenetrably silent to his
inquisitive daughter Barbara. After having walked up and down his room, conversing with himself, for
some time, the attorney concluded that the agency must be given to
somebody when Sir Arthur should have to attend his duty in Parliament;
that the agency, even for the winter season, was not a thing to be
neglected; and that, if he managed well, he might yet secure it for
himself. He had often found that small timely presents worked
wonderfully upon his own mind, and he judged of others by himself. The
tenants had been in the reluctant but constant practice of making him
continual petty offerings; and he resolved to try the same course with
Sir Arthur, whose resolution to be his own agent, he thought, argued a
close, saving, avaricious disposition. He had heard the housekeeper at
the Abbey inquiring, as he passed through the servants, whether there was
any lamb to be gotten? She said that Sir Arthur was remarkably fond of
lamb, and that she wished she could get a quarter for him. Immediately
he sallied into his kitchen, as soon as the idea struck him, and asked a
shepherd, who was waiting there, whether he knew of a nice fat lamb to be
had anywhere in the neighbourhood. "I know of one," cried Barbara. "Susan Price has a pet lamb that's as
fat as fat could be." The attorney easily caught at these words, and
speedily devised a scheme for obtaining Susan's lamb for nothing. It would be something strange if an attorney of his talents and standing
was not an over-match for Simple Susan. He prowled forth in search of
his prey. He found Susan packing up her father's little wardrobe; and
when she looked up as she knelt, he saw that she had been in tears. "How is your mother to-day, Susan?" inquired the attorney. "Worse, sir. My father goes to-morrow." "That's a pity." "It can't be helped," said Susan, with a sigh. "It can't be helped--how do you know that?" said Case. "Sir, DEAR sir!" cried she, looking up at him, and a sudden ray of hope
beamed in her ingenuous countenance. "And if YOU could help it, Susan?" said he. Susan clasped her hands in
silence, more expressive than words. "You CAN help it, Susan." She
started up in an ecstasy. "What would you give now to have your father
at home for a whole week longer?" "Anything!--but I have nothing." "Yes, but you have, a lamb," said the hard-hearted attorney. "My poor little lamb!" said Susan; "but what can that do?" "What good can any lamb do? Is not lamb good to eat? Why do you look so
pale, girl? Are not sheep killed every day, and don't you eat mutton? Is your lamb better than anybody else's, think you?" "I don't know," said Susan, "but I love it better." "More fool you," said he. "It feeds out of hand, it follows me about; I have always taken care of
it; my mother gave it to me." "Well, say no more about it, then," he cynically observed; "if you love
your lamb better than both your father and your mother, keep it, and good
morning to you." "Stay, oh stay!" cried Susan, catching the skirt of his coat with an
eager, trembling hand;--"a whole week, did you say? My mother may get
better in that time. No, I do not love my lamb half so well." The
struggle of her mind ceased, and with a placid countenance and calm
voice, "take the lamb," said she. "Where is it?" said the attorney. "Grazing in the meadow, by the river side." "It must be brought up before night-fall for the butcher, remember." "I shall not forget it," said Susan, steadily. As soon, however, as her persecutor turned his back and quitted the
house, Susan sat down, and hid her face in her hands. She was soon
aroused by the sound of her mother's feeble voice, who was calling Susan
from the inner room where she lay. Susan went in; but did not undraw the
curtain as she stood beside the bed. "Are you there, love? Undraw the curtain, that I may see you, and tell
me;--I thought I heard some strange voice just now talking to my child. Something's amiss, Susan," said her mother, raising herself as well as
she was able in the bed, to examine her daughter's countenance. "Would you think it amiss, then, my dear mother," said Susan, stooping to
kiss her--"would you think it amiss, if my father was to stay with us a
week longer?" "Susan! you don't say so?" "He is, indeed, a whole week;--but how burning hot your hand is still." "Are you sure he will stay?" inquired her mother. "How do you know? Who
told you so? Tell me all quick." "Attorney Case told me so; he can get him a week's longer leave of
absence, and he has promised he will." "God bless him for it, for ever and ever!" said the poor woman, joining
her hands. "May the blessing of heaven be with him!" Susan closed the curtains, and was silent. She COULD NOT SAY AMEN. She
was called out of the room at this moment, for a messenger was come from
the Abbey for the bread-bills. It was she who always made out the bills,
for though she had not a great number of lessons from the writing-master,
she had taken so much pains to learn that she could write a very neat,
legible hand, and she found this very useful. She was not, to be sure,
particularly inclined to draw out a long bill at this instant, but
business must be done. She set to work, ruled her lines for the pounds,
shillings and pence, made out the bill for the Abbey, and despatched the
impatient messenger. She then resolved to make out all the bills for the
neighbours, who had many of them taken a few loaves and rolls of her
baking. "I had better get all my business finished," said she to
herself, "before I go down to the meadow to take leave of my poor lamb." This was sooner said than done, for she found that she had a great number
of bills to write, and the slate on which she had entered the account was
not immediately to be found; and when it was found the figures were
almost rubbed out. Barbara had sat down upon it.