He
was so curious to know what it all meant that he couldn't wait another
minute. Now there was some one else with a great deal of curiosity also. He had
heard the screaming of Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay, and he had
listened until he couldn't stand it another minute. He just _had_ to
know what it was all about. So at the same time Farmer Brown's boy
started for the Green Forest, this other listener started towards the
place where Blacky and Sammy were making such a racket. He walked very
softly so as not to make a sound. It was Buster Bear. XIII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY AND BUSTER BEAR MEET


  If you should meet with Buster Bear
    While walking through the wood,
  What would you do? Now tell me true,
    _I'd_ run the best I could. That is what Farmer Brown's boy did when he met Buster Bear, and a lot
of the little people of the Green Forest and some from the Green Meadows
saw him. When Farmer Brown's boy came hurrying home from the Laughing
Brook without any fish one day and told about the great footprint he had
seen in a muddy place on the bank deep in the Green Forest, and had said
his was sure that it was the footprint of a Bear, he had been laughed
at. Farmer Brown had laughed and laughed. "Why," said he, "there hasn't been a Bear in the Green Forest for years
and years and years, not since my own grandfather was a little boy, and
that, you know, was a long, long, long time ago. If you want to find Mr.
Bear, you will have to go to the Great Woods. I don't know who made that
footprint, but it certainly couldn't have been a Bear. I think you must
have imagined it." Then he had laughed some more, all of which goes to show how easy it is
to be mistaken, and how foolish it is to laugh at things you really
don't know about. Buster Bear _had_ come to live in the Green Forest,
and Farmer Brown's boy _had_ seen his footprint. But Farmer Brown
laughed so much and made fun of him so much, that at last his boy began
to think that he must have been mistaken after all. So when he heard
Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay making a great fuss near the edge of the
Green Forest, he never once thought of Buster Bear, as he started over
to see what was going on. When Blacky and Sammy saw him coming, they moved a little farther in to
the Green Forest, still screaming in the most excited way. They felt
sure that Farmer Brown's boy would follow them, and they meant to lead
him to where Sammy had seen Buster Bear that morning. Then they would
find out for sure if what Little Joe Otter had said was true,--that
Farmer Brown's boy really was afraid of Buster Bear. Now all around, behind trees and stumps, and under thick branches, and
even in tree tops, were other little people watching with round,
wide-open eyes to see what would happen. It was very exciting, the most
exciting thing they could remember. You see, they had come to believe
that Farmer Brown's boy wasn't afraid of anybody or anything, and as
most of them were very much afraid of him, they had hard work to believe
that he would really be afraid of even such a great, big, strong fellow
as Buster Bear. Every one was so busy watching Farmer Brown's boy that
no one saw Buster coming from the other direction. You see, Buster walked very softly. Big as he is, he can walk without
making the teeniest, weeniest sound. And that is how it happened that no
one saw him or heard him until just as Farmer Brown's boy stepped out
from behind one side of a thick little hemlock-tree, Buster Bear stepped
out from behind the other side of that same little tree, and there they
were face to face! Then everybody held their breath, even Blacky the
Crow and Sammy Jay. For just a little minute it was so still there in
the Green Forest that not the least little sound could be heard. What
was going to happen? XIV

A SURPRISING THING HAPPENS


Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay, looking down from the top of a tall tree,
held their breath. Happy Jack the Gray Squirrel and his cousin,
Chatterer the Red Squirrel, looking down from another tree, held _their_
breath. Unc' Billy Possum, sticking his head out from a hollow tree,
held _his_ breath. Bobby Coon, looking through a hole in a hollow stump
in which he was hiding, held _his_ breath. Reddy Fox, lying flat down
behind a heap of brush, held _his_ breath. Peter Rabbit, sitting bolt
upright under a thick hemlock branch, with eyes and ears wide open, held
_his_ breath. And all the other little people who happened to be where
they could see did the same thing. You see, it was the most exciting moment ever was in the Green Forest. Farmer Brown's boy had just stepped out from behind one side of a little
hemlock-tree and Buster Bear had just stepped out from behind the
opposite side of the little hemlock-tree and neither had known that the
other was anywhere near. For a whole minute they stood there face to
face, gazing into each other's eyes, while everybody watched and waited,
and it seemed as if the whole Green Forest was holding its breath. Then something happened. Yes, Sir, something happened. Farmer Brown's
boy opened his mouth and yelled! It was such a sudden yell and such a
loud yell that it startled Chatterer so that he nearly fell from his
place in the tree, and it made Reddy Fox jump to his feet ready to run. And that yell was a yell of fright. There was no doubt about it, for
with the yell Farmer Brown's boy turned and ran for home, as no one ever
had seen him run before. He ran just as Peter Rabbit runs when he has
got to reach the dear Old Briar-patch before Reddy Fox can catch him,
which, you know, is as fast as he can run. Once he stumbled and fell,
but he scrambled to his feet in a twinkling, and away he went without
once turning his head to see if Buster Bear was after him. There wasn't
any doubt that he was afraid, very much afraid. Everybody leaned forward to watch him. "What did I tell you? Didn't I
say that he was afraid of Buster Bear?" cried Little Joe Otter, dancing
about with excitement. "You were right, Little Joe! I'm sorry that I doubted it. See him go! Caw, caw, caw!" shrieked Blacky the Crow. For a minute or two everybody forgot about Buster Bear. Then there was a
great crash which made everybody turn to look the other way. What do you
think they saw? Why, Buster Bear was running away too, and he was
running twice as fast as Farmer Brown's boy! He bumped into trees and
crashed through bushes and jumped over logs, and in almost no time at
all he was out of sight. Altogether it was the most surprising thing
that the little people of the Green Forest ever had seen. [Illustration: Buster Bear was running away, too. Page _71_.] Sammy Jay looked at Blacky the Crow, and Blacky looked at Chatterer,
and Chatterer looked at Happy Jack, and Happy Jack looked at Peter
Rabbit, and Peter looked at Unc' Billy Possum, and Unc' Billy looked at
Bobby Coon, and Bobby looked at Johnny Chuck, and Johnny looked at Reddy
Fox, and Reddy looked at Jimmy Skunk, and Jimmy looked at Billy Mink,
and Billy looked at Little Joe Otter, and for a minute nobody could say
a word. Then Little Joe gave a funny little gasp. "Why, why-e-e!" said he, "I believe Buster Bear is afraid too!" Unc'
Billy Possum chuckled. "Ah believe yo' are right again, Brer Otter,"
said he. "It cert'nly does look so. If Brer Bear isn't scared, he must
have remembered something impo'tant and has gone to attend to it in a
powerful hurry." Then everybody began to laugh. XV

BUSTER BEAR IS A FALLEN HERO


A fallen hero is some one to whom every one has looked up as very brave
and then proves to be less brave than he was supposed to be. That was
the way with Buster Bear. When Little Joe Otter had told how Farmer
Brown's boy had been afraid at the mere sight of one of Buster Bear's
big footprints, they had at once made a hero of Buster. At least some of
them had. As this was the first time, the very first time, that they had
ever known any one who lives in the Green Forest to make Farmer Brown's
boy run away, they looked on Buster Bear with a great deal of respect
and were very proud of him. But now they had seen Buster Bear and Farmer Brown's boy meet face to
face; and while it was true that Farmer Brown's boy had run away as fast
as ever he could, it was also true that Buster Bear had done the same
thing. He had run even faster than Farmer Brown's boy, and had hidden in
the most lonely place he could find in the very deepest part of the
Green Forest. It was hard to believe, but it was true. And right away
everybody lost a great deal of the respect for Buster which they had
felt. It is always that way. They began to say unkind things about him. They said them among themselves, and some of them even said them to
Buster when they met him, or said them so that he would hear them. Of course Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay, who, because they can fly,
have nothing to fear from Buster, and who always delight in making other
people uncomfortable, never let a chance go by to tell Buster and
everybody else within hearing what they thought of him. They delighted
in flying about through the Green Forest until they had found Buster
Bear and then from the safety of the tree tops screaming at him. "Buster Bear is big and strong;
  His teeth are big; his claws are long;
  In spite of these he runs away
  And hides himself the livelong day!" A dozen times a day Buster would hear them screaming this. He would
grind his teeth and glare up at them, but that was all he could do. He
couldn't get at them. He just had to stand it and do nothing. But when
impudent little Chatterer the Red Squirrel shouted the same thing from
a place just out of reach in a big pine-tree, Buster could stand it no
longer. He gave a deep, angry growl that made little shivers run over
Chatterer, and then suddenly he started up that tree after Chatterer. With a frightened little shriek Chatterer scampered to the top of the
tree.