called out Syme, in a sudden
anger that had something like fear underneath. Whether or no the
Professor could answer, he did not. Syme stood staring back at the stiff face like parchment and the
blank, blue eyes. His first thought was that the Professor had gone
mad, but his second thought was more frightful. After all, what did
he know about this queer creature whom he had heedlessly accepted
as a friend? What did he know, except that the man had been at the
anarchist breakfast and had told him a ridiculous tale? How
improbable it was that there should be another friend there beside
Gogol! Was this man's silence a sensational way of declaring war? Was this adamantine stare after all only the awful sneer of some
threefold traitor, who had turned for the last time? He stood and
strained his ears in this heartless silence. He almost fancied he
could hear dynamiters come to capture him shifting softly in the
corridor outside. Then his eye strayed downwards, and he burst out laughing. Though
the Professor himself stood there as voiceless as a statue, his
five dumb fingers were dancing alive upon the dead table. Syme
watched the twinkling movements of the talking hand, and read
clearly the message--

"I will only talk like this. We must get used to it." He rapped out the answer with the impatience of relief--

"All right. Let's get out to breakfast." They took their hats and sticks in silence; but as Syme took his
sword-stick, he held it hard. They paused for a few minutes only to stuff down coffee and coarse
thick sandwiches at a coffee stall, and then made their way across
the river, which under the grey and growing light looked as
desolate as Acheron. They reached the bottom of the huge block of
buildings which they had seen from across the river, and began in
silence to mount the naked and numberless stone steps, only pausing
now and then to make short remarks on the rail of the banisters. At
about every other flight they passed a window; each window showed
them a pale and tragic dawn lifting itself laboriously over London. From each the innumerable roofs of slate looked like the leaden
surges of a grey, troubled sea after rain. Syme was increasingly
conscious that his new adventure had somehow a quality of cold
sanity worse than the wild adventures of the past. Last night, for
instance, the tall tenements had seemed to him like a tower in a
dream. As he now went up the weary and perpetual steps, he was
daunted and bewildered by their almost infinite series. But it was
not the hot horror of a dream or of anything that might be
exaggeration or delusion. Their infinity was more like the empty
infinity of arithmetic, something unthinkable, yet necessary to
thought. Or it was like the stunning statements of astronomy about
the distance of the fixed stars. He was ascending the house of
reason, a thing more hideous than unreason itself. By the time they reached Dr. Bull's landing, a last window showed
them a harsh, white dawn edged with banks of a kind of coarse red,
more like red clay than red cloud. And when they entered Dr. Bull's
bare garret it was full of light. Syme had been haunted by a half historic memory in connection with
these empty rooms and that austere daybreak. The moment he saw the
garret and Dr. Bull sitting writing at a table, he remembered what
the memory was--the French Revolution. There should have been the
black outline of a guillotine against that heavy red and white of
the morning. Dr. Bull was in his white shirt and black breeches
only; his cropped, dark head might well have just come out of its
wig; he might have been Marat or a more slipshod Robespierre. Yet when he was seen properly, the French fancy fell away. The
Jacobins were idealists; there was about this man a murderous
materialism. His Dosition gave him a somewhat new appearance. The
strong, white light of morning coming from one side creating sharp
shadows, made him seem both more pale and more angular than he had
looked at the breakfast on the balcony. Thus the two black glasses
that encased his eyes might really have been black cavities in his
skull, making him look like a death's-head. And, indeed, if ever
Death himself sat writing at a wooden table, it might have been he. He looked up and smiled brightly enough as the men came in, and
rose with the resilient rapidity of which the Professor had
spoken. He set chairs for both of them, and going to a peg behind
the door, proceeded to put on a coat and waistcoat of rough, dark
tweed; he buttoned it up neatly, and came back to sit down at his
table. The quiet good humour of his manner left his two opponents
helpless. It was with some momentary difficulty that the
Professor broke silence and began, "I'm sorry to disturb you so
early, comrade," said he, with a careful resumption of the slow
de Worms manner. "You have no doubt made all the arrangements for
the Paris affair?" Then he added with infinite slowness, "We have
information which renders intolerable anything in the nature of a
moment's delay." Dr. Bull smiled again, but continued to gaze on them without
speaking. The Professor resumed, a pause before each weary word--

"Please do not think me excessively abrupt; but I advise you to
alter those plans, or if it is too late for that, to follow your
agent with all the support you can get for him. Comrade Syme and
I have had an experience which it would take more time to recount
than we can afford, if we are to act on it. I will, however,
relate the occurrence in detail, even at the risk of losing time,
if you really feel that it is essential to the understanding of
the problem we have to discuss." He was spinning out his sentences, making them intolerably long
and lingering, in the hope of maddening the practical little
Doctor into an explosion of impatience which might show his hand. But the little Doctor continued only to stare and smile, and the
monologue was uphill work. Syme began to feel a new sickness and
despair. The Doctor's smile and silence were not at all like the
cataleptic stare and horrible silence which he had confronted in
the Professor half an hour before. About the Professor's makeup
and all his antics there was always something merely grotesque,
like a gollywog. Syme remembered those wild woes of yesterday as
one remembers being afraid of Bogy in childhood. But here was
daylight; here was a healthy, square-shouldered man in tweeds,
not odd save for the accident of his ugly spectacles, not glaring
or grinning at all, but smiling steadily and not saying a word. The whole had a sense of unbearable reality. Under the increasing
sunlight the colours of the Doctor's complexion, the pattern of
his tweeds, grew and expanded outrageously, as such things grow
too important in a realistic novel. But his smile was quite
slight, the pose of his head polite; the only uncanny thing was
his silence. "As I say," resumed the Professor, like a man toiling through
heavy sand, "the incident that has occurred to us and has led
us to ask for information about the Marquis, is one which you
may think it better to have narrated; but as it came in the
way of Comrade Syme rather than me--"

His words he seemed to be dragging out like words in an anthem;
but Syme, who was watching, saw his long fingers rattle quickly
on the edge of the crazy table. He read the message, "You must
go on. This devil has sucked me dry!" Syme plunged into the breach with that bravado of improvisation
which always came to him when he was alarmed. "Yes, the thing really happened to me," he said hastily. "I had
the good fortune to fall into conversation with a detective who
took me, thanks to my hat, for a respectable person. Wishing to
clinch my reputation for respectability, I took him and made him
very drunk at the Savoy. Under this influence he became friendly,
and told me in so many words that within a day or two they hope
to arrest the Marquis in France. So unless you or I can get on his track--"

The Doctor was still smiling in the most friendly way, and his
protected eyes were still impenetrable. The Professor signalled to
Syme that he would resume his explanation, and he began again with
the same elaborate calm. "Syme immediately brought this information to me, and we came here
together to see what use you would be inclined to make of it. It
seems to me unquestionably urgent that--"

All this time Syme had been staring at the Doctor almost as
steadily as the Doctor stared at the Professor, but quite without
the smile. The nerves of both comrades-in-arms were near snapping
under that strain of motionless amiability, when Syme suddenly
leant forward and idly tapped the edge of the table. His message
to his ally ran, "I have an intuition." The Professor, with scarcely a pause in his monologue, signalled
back, "Then sit on it." Syme telegraphed, "It is quite extraordinary." The other answered, "Extraordinary rot!" Syme said, "I am a poet." The other retorted, "You are a dead man." Syme had gone quite red up to his yellow hair, and his eyes were
burning feverishly. As he said he had an intuition, and it had
risen to a sort of lightheaded certainty. Resuming his symbolic
taps, he signalled to his friend, "You scarcely realise how poetic
my intuition is. It has that sudden quality we sometimes feel in
the coming of spring." He then studied the answer on his friend's fingers. The answer
was, "Go to hell! " The Professor then resumed his merely verbal monologue addressed
to the Doctor. "Perhaps I should rather say," said Syme on his fingers, "that it
resembles that sudden smell of the sea which may be found in the
heart of lush woods." His companion disdained to reply. "Or yet again," tapped Syme, "it is positive, as is the passionate
red hair of a beautiful woman." The Professor was continuing his speech, but in the middle of it
Syme decided to act. He leant across the table, and said in a
voice that could not be neglected--

"Dr. Bull!" The Doctor's sleek and smiling head did not move, but they could
have sworn that under his dark glasses his eyes darted towards
Syme. "Dr. Bull," said Syme, in a voice peculiarly precise and
courteous, "would you do me a small favour? Would you be so kind
as to take off your spectacles?" The Professor swung round on his seat, and stared at Syme with a
sort of frozen fury of astonishment. Syme, like a man who has
thrown his life and fortune on the table, leaned forward with a
fiery face. The Doctor did not move. For a few seconds there was a silence in which one could hear a
pin drop, split once by the single hoot of a distant steamer on
the Thames.