Sorra a know she knowed
       Awhere she was that day;
     Says she, "I'm biled an' ate up, shure
       An' what'll be to pay?" Thin she betho't hersel',
       An' tuk her schissors out,
     An' shnipped a big hole in the bag,
       So she could look about. An' 'fore ould Fox could think
       She lept right out--she did,
     An' thin picked up a great big shtone,
       An' popped it in instid. An' thin she rins off home,
       Her outside door she locks;
     Thinks she, "You see you don't have me,
       You crafty, shly ould Fox." An' Fox he tugged away
       Wid the great big hivy shtone,
     Thimpin' his shoulders very bad
       As he wint in alone. An' whin he came in sight
       O' his great din o' rocks,
     Jist watchin' for him at the door
       He shpied ould mither Fox. "Have ye the pot a-bilin'?" Says he to ould Fox thin;
     "Shure an' it is, me child," says she;
       "Have ye the small Rid Hin?" "Yes, jist here in me bag,
       As shure as I shtand here;
     Open the lid till I pit her in:
       Open it--nivir fear." So the rashkill cut the shtring,
       An' hild the big bag over;
     "Now when I shake it in," says he,
       "Do ye pit on the cover." "Yis, that I will"; an' thin
       The shtone wint in wid a dash,
     An' the pot o' bilin' wather
       Came over them ker-splash. An' schalted 'em both to death,
       So they couldn't brathe no more;
     An' the little small Rid Hin lived safe,
       Jist where she lived before. THE STORY OF EPAMINONDAS AND HIS AUNTIE


Epaminondas used to go to see his Auntie 'most every day, and she nearly
always gave him something to take home to his Mammy. One day she gave him a big piece of cake; nice, yellow, rich gold-cake. Epaminondas took it in his fist and held it all crunched up tight, like
this, and came along home. By the time he got home there wasn't anything
left but a fistful of crumbs. His Mammy said,--

"What you got there, Epaminondas?" "Cake, Mammy," said Epaminondas. "Cake!" said his Mammy. "Epaminondas, you ain't got the sense you was
born with! That's no way to carry cake. The way to carry cake is to wrap
it all up nice in some leaves and put it in your hat, and put your hat
on your head, and come along home. You hear me, Epaminondas?" "Yes, Mammy," said Epaminondas. Next day Epaminondas went to see his Auntie, and she gave him a pound of
butter for his Mammy; fine, fresh, sweet butter. Epaminondas wrapped it up in leaves and put it in his hat, and put his
hat on his head, and came along home. It was a very hot day. Pretty soon
the butter began to melt. It melted, and melted, and as it melted it ran
down Epaminondas' forehead; then it ran over his face, and in his ears,
and down his neck. When he got home, all the butter Epaminondas had was
_on him_. His Mammy looked at him, and then she said,--

"Law's sake! Epaminondas, what you got in your hat?" "Butter, Mammy," said Epaminondas; "Auntie gave it to me." "Butter!" said his Mammy. "Epaminondas, you ain't got the sense you was
born with! Don't you know that's no way to carry butter? The way to
carry butter is to wrap it up in some leaves and take it down to the
brook, and cool it in the water, and cool it in the water, and cool it
in the water, and then take it on your hands, careful, and bring it
along home." "Yes, Mammy," said Epaminondas. By and by, another day, Epaminondas went to see his Auntie again, and;
this time she gave him a little new puppy-dog to take home. Epaminondas put it in some leaves and took it down to the brook; and
there he cooled it in the water, and cooled it in the water, and cooled
it in the water; then he took it in his hands and came along home. When
he got home, the puppy-dog was dead. His Mammy looked at it, and she
said,--

"Law's sake! Epaminondas, what you got there?" "A puppy-dog, Mammy," said Epaminondas. "A _puppy-dog_!" said his Mammy. "My gracious sakes alive, Epaminondas,
you ain't got the sense you was born with! That ain't the way to carry a
puppy-dog! The way to carry a puppy-dog is to take a long piece of
string and tie one end of it round the puppy-dog's neck and put the
puppy-dog on the ground, and take hold of the other end of the string
and come along home, like this." "All right, Mammy," said Epaminondas. Next day Epaminondas went to see his Auntie again, and when he came to
go home she gave him a loaf of bread to carry to his Mammy; a brown,
fresh, crusty loaf of bread. So Epaminondas tied a string around the end of the loaf and took hold of
the end of the string and came along home, like this. (Imitate dragging
something along the ground.) When he got home his Mammy looked at the
thing on the end of the string, and she said,--

"My laws a-massy! Epaminondas, what you got on the end of that string?" "Bread, Mammy," said Epaminondas; "Auntie gave it to me." "Bread!!!" said his Mammy. "O Epaminondas, Epaminondas, you ain't got
the sense you was born with; you never did have the sense you was born
with; you never will have the sense you was born with! Now I ain't gwine
tell you any more ways to bring truck home. And don't you go see your
Auntie, neither. I'll go see her my own self. But I'll just tell you one
thing, Epaminondas! You see these here six mince pies I done make? You
see how I done set 'em on the doorstep to cool? Well, now, you hear me,
Epaminondas, _you be careful how you step on those pies_!" "Yes, Mammy," said Epaminondas. Then Epaminondas' Mammy put on her bonnet and her shawl and took a
basket in her hand and went away to see Auntie. The six mince pies sat
cooling in a row on the doorstep. And then,--and then,--Epaminondas _was_ careful how he stepped on those
pies! He stepped (imitate)--right--in--the--middle--of--every--one. *       *       *       *       *

And, do you know, children, nobody knows what happened next! The person
who told me the story didn't know; nobody knows. But you can guess. THE BOY WHO CRIED "WOLF!" There was once a shepherd-boy who kept his flock at a little distance
from the village. Once he thought he would play a trick on the villagers
and have some fun at their expense. So he ran toward the village crying
out, with all his might,--

"Wolf! Wolf! Come and help! The wolves are at my lambs!" The kind villagers left their work and ran to the field to help him. But
when they got there the boy laughed at them for their pains; there was
no wolf there. Still another day the boy tried the same trick, and the villagers came
running to help and got laughed at again. Then one day a wolf did break into the fold and began killing the lambs. In great fright, the boy ran for help. "Wolf! Wolf!" he screamed. "There
is a wolf in the flock! Help!" The villagers heard him, but they thought it was another mean trick; no
one paid the least attention, or went near him. And the shepherd-boy
lost all his sheep. That is the kind of thing that happens to people who lie: even when they
tell the truth no one believes them. THE FROG KING


Did you ever hear the old story about the foolish Frogs? The Frogs in a
certain swamp decided that they needed a king; they had always got along
perfectly well without one, but they suddenly made up their minds that a
king they must have. They sent a messenger to Jove and begged him to
send a king to rule over them. Jove saw how stupid they were, and sent a king who could not harm them:
he tossed a big log into the middle of the pond.