How weake a thing
The heart of woman is? O Brutus,
The Heauens speede thee in thine enterprize. Sure the Boy heard me: Brutus hath a suite
That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint:
Run Lucius, and commend me to my Lord,
Say I am merry; Come to me againe,
And bring me word what he doth say to thee. Exeunt. Actus Tertius. Flourish

Enter Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Caska, Decius, Metellus, Trebonius,
Cynna,
Antony, Lepidus, Artimedorus, Publius, and the Soothsayer. Caes The Ides of March are come

   Sooth. I Caesar, but not gone

   Art. Haile Caesar: Read this Scedule

   Deci. Trebonius doth desire you to ore-read
(At your best leysure) this his humble suite

   Art. O Caesar, reade mine first: for mine's a suite
That touches Caesar neerer. Read it great Caesar

   Caes What touches vs our selfe, shall be last seru'd

   Art. Delay not Caesar, read it instantly

   Caes What, is the fellow mad? Pub. Sirra, giue place

   Cassi. What, vrge you your Petitions in the street? Come to the Capitoll

   Popil. I wish your enterprize to day may thriue

   Cassi. What enterprize Popillius? Popil. Fare you well

   Bru. What said Popillius Lena? Cassi. He wisht to day our enterprize might thriue:
I feare our purpose is discouered

   Bru. Looke how he makes to Caesar: marke him

   Cassi. Caska be sodaine, for we feare preuention. Brutus what shall be done? If this be knowne,
Cassius or Caesar neuer shall turne backe,
For I will slay my selfe

   Bru. Cassius be constant:
Popillius Lena speakes not of our purposes,
For looke he smiles, and Caesar doth not change

   Cassi. Trebonius knowes his time: for look you Brutus
He drawes Mark Antony out of the way

   Deci. Where is Metellus Cimber, let him go,
And presently preferre his suite to Caesar

   Bru. He is addrest: presse neere, and second him

   Cin. Caska, you are the first that reares your hand

   Caes Are we all ready? What is now amisse,
That Caesar and his Senate must redresse? Metel. Most high, most mighty, and most puisant Caesar
Metellus Cymber throwes before thy Seate
An humble heart

   Caes I must preuent thee Cymber:
These couchings, and these lowly courtesies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men,
And turne pre-Ordinance, and first Decree
Into the lane of Children. Be not fond,
To thinke that Caesar beares such Rebell blood
That will be thaw'd from the true quality
With that which melteth Fooles, I meane sweet words,
Low-crooked-curtsies, and base Spaniell fawning:
Thy Brother by decree is banished:
If thou doest bend, and pray, and fawne for him,
I spurne thee like a Curre out of my way:
Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
Will he be satisfied

   Metel. Is there no voyce more worthy then my owne,
To sound more sweetly in great Caesars eare,
For the repealing of my banish'd Brother? Bru. I kisse thy hand, but not in flattery Caesar:
Desiring thee, that Publius Cymber may
Haue an immediate freedome of repeale

   Caes What Brutus? Cassi. Pardon Caesar: Caesar pardon:
As lowe as to thy foote doth Cassius fall,
To begge infranchisement for Publius Cymber

   Caes I could be well mou'd, if I were as you,
If I could pray to mooue, Prayers would mooue me:
But I am constant as the Northerne Starre,
Of whose true fixt, and resting quality,
There is no fellow in the Firmament. The Skies are painted with vnnumbred sparkes,
They are all Fire, and euery one doth shine:
But, there's but one in all doth hold his place. So, in the World; 'Tis furnish'd well with Men,
And Men are Flesh and Blood, and apprehensiue;
Yet in the number, I do know but One
That vnassayleable holds on his Ranke,
Vnshak'd of Motion: and that I am he,
Let me a little shew it, euen in this:
That I was constant Cymber should be banish'd,
And constant do remaine to keepe him so

   Cinna. O Caesar

   Caes Hence: Wilt thou lift vp Olympus? Decius. Great Caesar

   Caes Doth not Brutus bootlesse kneele? Cask. Speake hands for me. They stab Caesar. Caes Et Tu Brute? - Then fall Caesar. Dyes

  Cin. Liberty, Freedome; Tyranny is dead,
Run hence, proclaime, cry it about the Streets

   Cassi. Some to the common Pulpits, and cry out
Liberty, Freedome, and Enfranchisement

   Bru. People and Senators, be not affrighted:
Fly not, stand still: Ambitions debt is paid

   Cask. Go to the Pulpit Brutus

   Dec. And Cassius too

   Bru. Where's Publius? Cin. Heere, quite confounded with this mutiny

   Met. Stand fast together, least some Friend of Caesars
Should chance-
  Bru. Talke not of standing. Publius good cheere,
There is no harme intended to your person,
Nor to no Roman else: so tell them Publius

   Cassi. And leaue vs Publius, least that the people
Rushing on vs, should do your Age some mischiefe

   Bru. Do so, and let no man abide this deede,
But we the Doers. Enter Trebonius

   Cassi. Where is Antony? Treb. Fled to his House amaz'd:
Men, Wiues, and Children, stare, cry out, and run,
As it were Doomesday

   Bru. Fates, we will know your pleasures:
That we shall dye we know, 'tis but the time
And drawing dayes out, that men stand vpon

   Cask. Why he that cuts off twenty yeares of life,
Cuts off so many yeares of fearing death

   Bru. Grant that, and then is Death a Benefit:
So are we Caesars Friends, that haue abridg'd
His time of fearing death. Stoope Romans, stoope,
And let vs bathe our hands in Caesars blood
Vp to the Elbowes, and besmeare our Swords:
Then walke we forth, euen to the Market place,
And wauing our red Weapons o're our heads,
Let's all cry Peace, Freedome, and Liberty

   Cassi. Stoop then, and wash. How many Ages hence
Shall this our lofty Scene be acted ouer,
In State vnborne, and Accents yet vnknowne? Bru. How many times shall Caesar bleed in sport,
That now on Pompeyes Basis lye along,
No worthier then the dust? Cassi. So oft as that shall be,
So often shall the knot of vs be call'd,
The Men that gaue their Country liberty

   Dec. What, shall we forth? Cassi. I, euery man away. Brutus shall leade, and we will grace his heeles
With the most boldest, and best hearts of Rome. Enter a Seruant. Bru. Soft, who comes heere? A friend of Antonies

   Ser. Thus Brutus did my Master bid me kneele;
Thus did Mark Antony bid me fall downe,
And being prostrate, thus he bad me say:
Brutus is Noble, Wise, Valiant, and Honest;
Caesar was Mighty, Bold, Royall, and Louing:
Say, I loue Brutus, and I honour him;
Say, I fear'd Caesar, honour'd him, and lou'd him. If Brutus will vouchsafe, that Antony
May safely come to him, and be resolu'd
How Caesar hath deseru'd to lye in death,
Mark Antony, shall not loue Caesar dead
So well as Brutus liuing; but will follow
The Fortunes and Affayres of Noble Brutus,
Thorough the hazards of this vntrod State,
With all true Faith. So sayes my Master Antony

   Bru. Thy Master is a Wise and Valiant Romane,
I neuer thought him worse:
Tell him, so please him come vnto this place
He shall be satisfied: and by my Honor
Depart vntouch'd

   Ser. Ile fetch him presently. Exit Seruant. Bru. I know that we shall haue him well to Friend

   Cassi. I wish we may: But yet haue I a minde
That feares him much: and my misgiuing still
Falles shrewdly to the purpose. Enter Antony. Bru. But heere comes Antony:
Welcome Mark Antony

   Ant. O mighty Caesar! Dost thou lye so lowe?