I cannot, by the progresse of the Starres,
Giue guesse how neere to day- Lucius, I say? I would it were my fault to sleepe so soundly. When Lucius, when? awake, I say: what Lucius? Enter Lucius. Luc. Call'd you, my Lord? Brut. Get me a Tapor in my Study, Lucius:
When it is lighted, come and call me here

   Luc. I will, my Lord. Enter. Brut. It must be by his death: and for my part,
I know no personall cause, to spurne at him,
But for the generall. He would be crown'd:
How that might change his nature, there's the question? It is the bright day, that brings forth the Adder,
And that craues warie walking: Crowne him that,
And then I graunt we put a Sting in him,
That at his will he may doe danger with. Th' abuse of Greatnesse, is, when it dis-ioynes
Remorse from Power: And to speake truth of Caesar,
I haue not knowne, when his Affections sway'd
More then his Reason. But 'tis a common proofe,
That Lowlynesse is young Ambitions Ladder,
Whereto the Climber vpward turnes his Face:
But when he once attaines the vpmost Round,
He then vnto the Ladder turnes his Backe,
Lookes in the Clouds, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend: so Caesar may;
Then least he may, preuent. And since the Quarrell
Will beare no colour, for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus; that what he is, augmented,
Would runne to these, and these extremities:
And therefore thinke him as a Serpents egge,
Which hatch'd, would as his kinde grow mischieuous;
And kill him in the shell. Enter Lucius. Luc. The Taper burneth in your Closet, Sir:
Searching the Window for a Flint, I found
This Paper, thus seal'd vp, and I am sure
It did not lye there when I went to Bed. Giues him the Letter. Brut. Get you to Bed againe, it is not day:
Is not to morrow (Boy) the first of March? Luc. I know not, Sir

   Brut. Looke in the Calender, and bring me word

   Luc. I will, Sir. Enter. Brut. The exhalations, whizzing in the ayre,
Giue so much light, that I may reade by them. Opens the Letter, and reades. Brutus thou sleep'st; awake, and see thy selfe:
Shall Rome, &c. speake, strike, redresse. Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake. Such instigations haue beene often dropt,
Where I haue tooke them vp:
Shall Rome, &c. Thus must I piece it out:
Shall Rome stand vnder one mans awe? What Rome? My Ancestors did from the streetes of Rome
The Tarquin driue, when he was call'd a King. Speake, strike, redresse. Am I entreated
To speake, and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redresse will follow, thou receiuest
Thy full Petition at the hand of Brutus. Enter Lucius. Luc. Sir, March is wasted fifteene dayes. Knocke within. Brut. 'Tis good. Go to the Gate, some body knocks:
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
I haue not slept. Betweene the acting of a dreadfull thing,
And the first motion, all the Interim is
Like a Phantasma, or a hideous Dreame:
The Genius, and the mortall Instruments
Are then in councell; and the state of a man,
Like to a little Kingdome, suffers then
The nature of an Insurrection. Enter Lucius. Luc. Sir, 'tis your Brother Cassius at the Doore,
Who doth desire to see you

   Brut. Is he alone? Luc. No, Sir, there are moe with him

   Brut. Doe you know them? Luc. No, Sir, their Hats are pluckt about their Eares,
And halfe their Faces buried in their Cloakes,
That by no meanes I may discouer them,
By any marke of fauour

   Brut. Let 'em enter:
They are the Faction. O Conspiracie,
Sham'st thou to shew thy dang'rous Brow by Night,
When euills are most free? O then, by day
Where wilt thou finde a Cauerne darke enough,
To maske thy monstrous Visage? Seek none Conspiracie,
Hide it in Smiles, and Affabilitie:
For if thou path thy natiue semblance on,
Not Erebus it selfe were dimme enough,
To hide thee from preuention. Enter the Conspirators, Cassius, Caska, Decius, Cinna, Metellus,
and
Trebonius. Cass. I thinke we are too bold vpon your Rest:
Good morrow Brutus, doe we trouble you? Brut. I haue beene vp this howre, awake all Night:
Know I these men, that come along with you? Cass. Yes, euery man of them; and no man here
But honors you: and euery one doth wish,
You had but that opinion of your selfe,
Which euery Noble Roman beares of you. This is Trebonius

   Brut. He is welcome hither

   Cass. This, Decius Brutus

   Brut. He is welcome too

   Cass. This, Caska; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus
Cymber

   Brut. They are all welcome. What watchfull Cares doe interpose themselues
Betwixt your Eyes, and Night? Cass. Shall I entreat a word? They whisper. Decius. Here lyes the East: doth not the Day breake
heere? Cask. No

   Cin. O pardon, Sir, it doth; and yon grey Lines,
That fret the Clouds, are Messengers of Day

   Cask. You shall confesse, that you are both deceiu'd:
Heere, as I point my Sword, the Sunne arises,
Which is a great way growing on the South,
Weighing the youthfull Season of the yeare. Some two moneths hence, vp higher toward the North
He first presents his fire, and the high East
Stands as the Capitoll, directly heere

   Bru. Giue me your hands all ouer, one by one

   Cas. And let vs sweare our Resolution

   Brut. No, not an Oath: if not the Face of men,
The sufferance of our Soules, the times Abuse;
If these be Motiues weake, breake off betimes,
And euery man hence, to his idle bed:
So let high-sighted-Tyranny range on,
Till each man drop by Lottery. But if these
(As I am sure they do) beare fire enough
To kindle Cowards, and to steele with valour
The melting Spirits of women. Then Countrymen,
What neede we any spurre, but our owne cause
To pricke vs to redresse? What other Bond,
Then secret Romans, that haue spoke the word,
And will not palter? And what other Oath,
Then Honesty to Honesty ingag'd,
That this shall be, or we will fall for it. Sweare Priests and Cowards, and men Cautelous
Old feeble Carrions, and such suffering Soules
That welcome wrongs: Vnto bad causes, sweare
Such Creatures as men doubt; but do not staine
The euen vertue of our Enterprize,
Nor th' insuppressiue Mettle of our Spirits,
To thinke, that or our Cause, or our Performance
Did neede an Oath. When euery drop of blood
That euery Roman beares, and Nobly beares
Is guilty of a seuerall Bastardie,
If he do breake the smallest Particle
Of any promise that hath past from him

   Cas. But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him? I thinke he will stand very strong with vs

   Cask. Let vs not leaue him out

   Cyn. No, by no meanes

   Metel. O let vs haue him, for his Siluer haires
Will purchase vs a good opinion:
And buy mens voyces, to commend our deeds:
It shall be sayd, his iudgement rul'd our hands,
Our youths, and wildenesse, shall no whit appeare,
But all be buried in his Grauity

   Bru.