hey? Land. Ay, your worship, my old magpie. Who'd have thought it? Miss was
very clever; it was she caught the thief. Miss was very clever. Old M.  Very good! very good! Just. Ay, darling, her father's own child! How was it, child? Caught
the thief, WITH THE MAINOUR, hey? Tell us all; I will hear all--that's
poz! Lucy. Oh! then first I must tell you how I came to suspect Mr. Magpie. Do you remember, papa, that day last summer, when I went with you to the
bowling-green, at the "Saracen's Head"? Land. Oh, of all days in the year! but I ask pardon, miss. Lucy. Well, that day I heard my uncle and another gentleman telling
stories of magpies hiding money; and they laid a wager about this old
magpie and they tried him--they put a shilling upon the table, and he ran
away with it, and hid it; so I thought that he might do so again, you
know, this time. Just. Right, right. It's a pity, child, you are not upon the Bench; ha! ha! ha! Lucy. And when I went to his old hiding place, there it was; but you
see, papa, he did not take the box. Just. No, no, no! because the thief was a magpie. No MAN would have
taken the money and left the box. You see I was right; no MAN would have
left the box, hey? Lucy. Certainly not, I suppose; but I'm so very glad, old man, that you
have obtained your money. Just. Well then, child, here--take my purse, and add that to it. We
were a little too hasty with the committal--hey? Land. Ay, and I fear I was, too; but when one is touched about the
credit of one's house, one's apt to speak warmly. Old M.  Oh, I'm the happiest old man alive! You are all convinced that I
told you no lies. Say no more--say no more. I am the happiest man! Miss, you have made me the happiest man alive! Bless you for it! Land. Well now, I'll tell you what. I know what I think--you must keep
that there magpie, and make a show of him, and I warrant he'll bring you
many an honest penny; for it's a TRUE STORY, and folks would like to hear
it, I hopes--

Just. (eagerly). And, friend, do you hear? you'll dine here today,
you'll dine here. We have some excellent ale. I will have you drink my
health--that's poz!--hey? You'll drink my health, won't you--hey? Old M.  (bows). Oh! and the young lady's, if you please. Just. Ay, ay, drink her health--she deserves it. Ay, drink my darling's
health. Land. And please your worship, it's the right time, I believe, to speak
of the goose-pie now; and a charming pie it is, and it's on the table. Will. And Mr. Smack, the curate, and Squire Solid, and the doctor, sir,
are come, and dinner is upon the table. Just. Then let us say no more; but do justice immediately to the goose-
pie; and, darling, put me in mind to tell this story after dinner. (After they go out, the Justice stops.) "Tell this story"--I don't know whether it tells well for me; but I'll
never be positive any more--THAT'S POZ! THE MIMIC. CHAPTER I.

Mr. and Mrs. Montague spent the summer of the year 1795 at Clifton with
their son Frederick, and their two daughters Sophia and Marianne. They
had taken much care of the education of their children; nor were they
ever tempted, by any motive of personal convenience or temporary
amusement, to hazard the permanent happiness of their pupils. Sensible of the extreme importance of early impressions, and of the
powerful influence of external circumstances in forming the characters
and the manners, they were now anxious that the variety of new ideas and
new objects which would strike the minds of their children should appear
in a just point of view. "Let children see and judge for themselves," is often inconsiderately
said. Where children see only a part they cannot judge of the whole; and
from the superficial view which they can have in short visits and
desultory conversation, they can form only a false estimate of the
objects of human happiness, a false notion of the nature of society, and
false opinions of characters. For the above reasons, Mr. and Mrs. Montague were particularly cautious
in the choice of their acquaintances, as they were well aware that
whatever passed in conversation before children became part of their
education. When they came to Clifton they wished to have a house entirely to
themselves, but, as they came late in the season, almost all the lodging
houses were full, and for a few weeks they were obliged to remain in a
house where some of the apartments were already occupied. During the first fortnight they scarcely saw or heard anything of one of
the families who lodged on the same floor with them. An elderly quaker,
and his sister Bertha, were their silent neighbours. The blooming
complexion of the lady had indeed attracted the attention of the
children, as they caught a glimpse of her face when she was getting into
her carriage to go out upon the Downs. They could scarcely believe that
she came to the Wells on account of her health. Besides her blooming complexion, the delicate white of her garments had
struck them with admiration; and they observed that her brother carefully
guarded her dress from the wheel of the carriage, as he handed her in. From this circumstance, and from the benevolent countenance of the old
gentleman, they concluded that he was very fond of his sister, and that
they were certainly very happy, except that they never spoke, and could
be seen only for a moment. Not so the maiden lady who occupied the ground floor. On the stairs, in
the passages, at her window, she was continually visible; and she
appeared to possess the art of being present in all these places at once. Her voice was eternally to be heard, and it was not particularly
melodious. The very first day she met Mrs. Montague's children on the
stairs, she stopped to tell Marianne that she was a charming dear, and a
charming little dear; to kiss her, to inquire her name, and to inform her
that her own name was "Mrs. Theresa Tattle," a circumstance of which
there was little danger of their long remaining in ignorance; for, in the
course of one morning, at least twenty single and as many double raps at
the door were succeeded by vociferations of "Mrs. Theresa Tattle's
servant!" "Mrs. Theresa Tattle at home?" "Mrs. Theresa Tattle not at
home!" No person at the Wells was oftener at home and abroad than Mrs. Tattle. She had, as she deemed it, the happiness to have a most extensive
acquaintance residing at Clifton. She had for years kept a register of
arrivals. She regularly consulted the subscriptions to the circulating
libraries, and the lists at the Ball and the Pump-rooms:  so that, with a
memory unencumbered with literature, and free from all domestic cares,
she contrived to retain a most astonishing and correct list of births,
deaths and marriages, together with all the anecdotes, amusing,
instructive, or scandalous, which are necessary to the conversation of a
water drinking place, and essential to the character of a "very pleasant
woman." "A very pleasant woman," Mrs. Tattle was usually called; and, conscious
of her accomplishments, she was eager to introduce herself to the
acquaintance of her new neighbours; having, with her ordinary expedition,
collected from their servants, by means of her own, all that could be
known, or rather, all that could be told about them. The name of
Montague, at all events, she knew was a good name, and justified in
courting the acquaintance. She courted it first by nods, and becks and
smiles at Marianne whenever she met her; and Marianne, who was a very
little girl, began presently to nod and smile in return, persuaded that a
lady who smiled so much, could not be ill-natured. Besides, Mrs.
Theresa's parlour door was sometimes left more than half open, to afford
a view of a green parrot. Marianne sometimes passed very slowly by this
door. One morning it was left quite wide open, when she stopped to say
"Pretty Poll"; and immediately Mrs. Tattle begged she would do her the
honour to walk in and see "Pretty Poll," at the same time taking the
liberty to offer her a piece of iced plum-cake.