Oh, Rosincrane; good Lads: How doe ye
both? Rosin. As the indifferent Children of the earth

   Guild. Happy, in that we are not ouer-happy: on Fortunes
Cap, we are not the very Button

   Ham. Nor the Soales of her Shoo? Rosin. Neither my Lord

   Ham. Then you liue about her waste, or in the middle
of her fauour? Guil. Faith, her priuates, we

   Ham. In the secret parts of Fortune? Oh, most true:
she is a Strumpet. What's the newes? Rosin. None my Lord; but that the World's growne
honest

   Ham. Then is Doomesday neere: But your newes is
not true. Let me question more in particular: what haue
you my good friends, deserued at the hands of Fortune,
that she sends you to Prison hither? Guil. Prison, my Lord? Ham. Denmark's a Prison

   Rosin. Then is the World one

   Ham. A goodly one, in which there are many Confines,
Wards, and Dungeons; Denmarke being one o'th'
worst

   Rosin. We thinke not so my Lord

   Ham. Why then 'tis none to you; for there is nothing
either good or bad, but thinking makes it so: to me it is
a prison

   Rosin. Why then your Ambition makes it one: 'tis
too narrow for your minde

   Ham. O God, I could be bounded in a nutshell, and
count my selfe a King of infinite space; were it not that
I haue bad dreames

   Guil. Which dreames indeed are Ambition: for the
very substance of the Ambitious, is meerely the shadow
of a Dreame

   Ham. A dreame it selfe is but a shadow

   Rosin. Truely, and I hold Ambition of so ayry and
light a quality, that it is but a shadowes shadow

   Ham. Then are our Beggers bodies; and our Monarchs
and out-stretcht Heroes the Beggers Shadowes:
shall wee to th' Court: for, by my fey I cannot reason? Both. Wee'l wait vpon you

   Ham. No such matter. I will not sort you with the
rest of my seruants: for to speake to you like an honest
man: I am most dreadfully attended; but in the beaten
way of friendship, What make you at Elsonower? Rosin. To visit you my Lord, no other occasion

   Ham. Begger that I am, I am euen poore in thankes;
but I thanke you: and sure deare friends my thanks
are too deare a halfepeny; were you not sent for? Is it
your owne inclining? Is it a free visitation? Come,
deale iustly with me: come, come; nay speake

   Guil. What should we say my Lord? Ham. Why any thing. But to the purpose; you were
sent for; and there is a kinde confession in your lookes;
which your modesties haue not craft enough to color,
I know the good King & Queene haue sent for you

   Rosin. To what end my Lord? Ham. That you must teach me: but let mee coniure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of
our youth, by the Obligation of our euer-preserued loue,
and by what more deare, a better proposer could charge
you withall; be euen and direct with me, whether you
were sent for or no

   Rosin. What say you? Ham. Nay then I haue an eye of you: if you loue me
hold not off

   Guil. My Lord, we were sent for

   Ham. I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
preuent your discouery of your secricie to the King and
Queene: moult no feather, I haue of late, but wherefore
I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custome of exercise;
and indeed, it goes so heauenly with my disposition;
that this goodly frame the Earth, seemes to me a sterrill
Promontory; this most excellent Canopy the Ayre,
look you, this braue ore-hanging, this Maiesticall Roofe,
fretted with golden fire: why, it appeares no other thing
to mee, then a foule and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of worke is a man! how Noble in
Reason? how infinite in faculty? in forme and mouing
how expresse and admirable? in Action, how like an Angel? in apprehension, how like a God? the beauty of the
world, the Parragon of Animals; and yet to me, what is
this Quintessence of Dust? Man delights not me; no,
nor Woman neither; though by your smiling you seeme
to say so

   Rosin. My Lord, there was no such stuffe in my
thoughts

   Ham. Why did you laugh, when I said, Man delights
not me? Rosin. To thinke, my Lord, if you delight not in Man,
what Lenton entertainment the Players shall receiue
from you: wee coated them on the way, and hither are
they comming to offer you Seruice

   Ham. He that playes the King shall be welcome; his
Maiesty shall haue Tribute of mee: the aduenturous
Knight shal vse his Foyle and Target: the Louer shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
peace: the Clowne shall make those laugh whose lungs
are tickled a'th' sere: and the Lady shall say her minde
freely; or the blanke Verse shall halt for't: what Players
are they? Rosin. Euen those you were wont to take delight in
the Tragedians of the City

   Ham. How chances it they trauaile? their residence
both in reputation and profit was better both
wayes

   Rosin. I thinke their Inhibition comes by the meanes
of the late Innouation? Ham. Doe they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the City? Are they so follow'd? Rosin. No indeed, they are not

   Ham. How comes it? doe they grow rusty? Rosin. Nay, their indeauour keepes in the wonted
pace; But there is Sir an ayrie of Children, little
Yases, that crye out on the top of question; and
are most tyrannically clap't for't: these are now the
fashion, and so be-ratled the common Stages (so they
call them) that many wearing Rapiers, are affraide of
Goose-quils, and dare scarse come thither

   Ham. What are they Children? Who maintains 'em? How are they escorted? Will they pursue the Quality no
longer then they can sing? Will they not say afterwards
if they should grow themselues to common Players (as
it is most like if their meanes are not better) their Writers
do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their
owne Succession

   Rosin. Faith there ha's bene much to do on both sides:
and the Nation holds it no sinne, to tarre them to Controuersie. There was for a while, no mony bid for argument,
vnlesse the Poet and the Player went to Cuffes in
the Question

   Ham. Is't possible? Guild. Oh there ha's beene much throwing about of
Braines

   Ham. Do the Boyes carry it away? Rosin. I that they do my Lord. Hercules & his load too

   Ham. It is not strange: for mine Vnckle is King of
Denmarke, and those that would make mowes at him
while my Father liued; giue twenty, forty, an hundred
Ducates a peece, for his picture in Little. There is something
in this more then Naturall, if Philosophie could
finde it out. Flourish for the Players. Guil. There are the Players

   Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcom to Elsonower: your
hands, come: The appurtenance of Welcome, is Fashion
and Ceremony.