Oh, my,
no! He just chomped them all up together and patted his stomach from
sheer delight. Now Buster had reached the Old Pasture just as jolly,
round, red Mr. Sun had crept out of bed, and he had fully made up his
mind that he would be back in the Green Forest before Mr. Sun had
climbed very far up in the blue, blue sky. You see, big as he is and
strong as he is, Buster Bear is very shy and bashful, and he has no
desire to meet Farmer Brown, or Farmer Brown's boy, or any other of
those two-legged creatures called men. It seems funny but he actually is
afraid of them. And he had a feeling that he was a great deal more
likely to meet one of them in the Old Pasture than deep in the Green
Forest. So when he started to look for berries, he made up his mind that he
would eat what he could in a great hurry and get back to the Green
Forest before Farmer Brown's boy was more than out of bed. But when he
found those berries he was so hungry that he forgot his fears and
everything else. They tasted so good that he just had to eat and eat
and eat. Now you know that Buster is a very big fellow, and it takes a
lot to fill him up. He kept eating and eating and eating, and the more
he ate the more he wanted. You know how it is. So he wandered from one
patch of berries to another in the Old Pasture, and never once thought
of the time. Somehow, time is the hardest thing in the world to
remember, when you are having a good time. Jolly, round, red Mr. Sun climbed higher and higher in the blue, blue
sky. He looked down on all the Great World and saw all that was going
on. He saw Buster Bear in the Old Pasture, and smiled as he saw what a
perfectly glorious time Buster was having. And he saw something else in
the Old Pasture that made his smile still broader. He saw Farmer Brown's
boy filling a great tin pail with blueberries, and he knew that Farmer
Brown's boy didn't know that Buster Bear was anywhere about, and he knew
that Buster Bear didn't know that Farmer Brown's boy was anywhere about,
and somehow he felt very sure that he would see something funny happen
if they should chance to meet. "Um-m-m, um-m-m," mumbled Buster Bear with his mouth full, as he moved
along to another patch of berries. And then he gave a little gasp of
surprise and delight. Right in front of him was a shiny thing just full
of the finest, biggest, bluest berries! There were no leaves or green
ones there. Buster blinked his greedy little eyes rapidly and looked
again. No, he wasn't dreaming. They were real berries, and all he had
got to do was to help himself. Buster looked sharply at the shiny thing
that held the berries. It seemed perfectly harmless. He reached out a
big paw and pushed it gently. It tipped over and spilled out a lot of
the berries. Yes, it was perfectly harmless. Buster gave a little sigh
of pure happiness. He would eat those berries to the last one, and then
he would go home to the Green Forest. XX

BUSTER BEAR CARRIES OFF THE PAIL OF FARMER BROWN'S BOY


The question is, did Buster Bear steal Farmer Brown's boy's pail? To
steal is to take something which belongs to some one else. There is no
doubt that he stole the berries that were in the pail when he found it,
for he deliberately ate them. He knew well enough that some one must
have picked them--for whoever heard of blueberries growing in tin pails? So there is no doubt that when Buster took them, he stole them. But with
the pail it was different. He took the pail, but he didn't mean to take
it. In fact, he didn't want that pail at all. You see it was this way: When Buster found that big tin pail brimming
full of delicious berries in the shade of that big bush in the Old
Pasture, he didn't stop to think whether or not he had a right to them. Buster is so fond of berries that from the very second that his greedy
little eyes saw that pailful, he forgot everything but the feast that
was waiting for him right under his very nose. He didn't think anything
about the right or wrong of helping himself. There before him were more
berries than he had ever seen together at one time in all his life, and
all he had to do was to eat and eat and eat. And that is just what he
did do. Of course he upset the pail, but he didn't mind a little thing
like that. When he had gobbled up all the berries that rolled out, he
thrust his nose into the pail to get all that were left in it. Just
then he heard a little noise, as if some one were coming. He threw up
his head to listen, and somehow, he never did know just how, the handle
of the pail slipped back over his ears and caught there. This was bad enough, but to make matters worse, just at that very minute
he heard a shrill, angry voice shout, "Hi, there! Get out of there!" He
didn't need to be told whose voice that was. It was the voice of Farmer
Brown's boy. Right then and there Buster Bear nearly had a fit. There
was that awful pail fast over his head so that he couldn't see a thing. Of course, that meant that he couldn't run away, which was the thing of
all things he most wanted to do, for big as he is and strong as he is,
Buster is very shy and bashful when human beings are around. He growled
and whined and squealed. He tried to back out of the pail and couldn't. He tried to shake it off and couldn't. He tried to pull it off, but
somehow he couldn't get hold of it. Then there was another yell. If
Buster hadn't been so frightened himself, he might have recognized that
second yell as one of fright, for that is what it was. You see Farmer
Brown's boy had just discovered Buster Bear. When he had yelled the
first time, he had supposed that it was one of the young cattle who live
in the Old Pasture all summer, but when he saw Buster, he was just as
badly frightened as Buster himself. In fact, he was too surprised and
frightened even to run. After that second yell he just stood still and
stared. Buster clawed at that awful thing on his head more frantically than
ever. Suddenly it slipped off, so that he could see. He gave one
frightened look at Farmer Brown's boy, and then with a mighty "Woof!" he
started for the Green Forest as fast as his legs could take him, and
this was very fast indeed, let me tell you. He didn't stop to pick out a
path, but just crashed through the bushes as if they were nothing at
all, just nothing at all. But the funniest thing of all is this--he took
that pail with him! Yes, Sir, Buster Bear ran away with the big tin pail
of Farmer Brown's boy! You see when it slipped off his head, the handle
was still around his neck, and there he was running away with a pail
hanging from his neck! He didn't want it. He would have given anything
to get rid of it. But he took it because he couldn't help it. And that
brings us back to the question, did Buster steal Farmer Brown's boy's
pail? What do you think? XXI

SAMMY JAY MAKES THINGS WORSE FOR BUSTER BEAR


"Thief, thief, thief! Thief, thief, thief!" Sammy Jay was screaming at
the top of his lungs, as he followed Buster Bear across the Old Pasture
towards the Green Forest. Never had he screamed so loud, and never had
his voice sounded so excited. The little people of the Green Forest, the
Green Meadows, and the Smiling Pool are so used to hearing Sammy cry
thief that usually they think very little about it. But every blessed
one who heard Sammy this morning stopped whatever he was doing and
pricked up his ears to listen. Sammy's cousin, Blacky the Crow, just happened to be flying along the
edge of the Old Pasture, and the minute he heard Sammy's voice, he
turned and flew over to see what it was all about. Just as soon as he
caught sight of Buster Bear running for the Green Forest as hard as ever
he could, he understood what had excited Sammy so. He was so surprised
that he almost forgot to keep his wings moving. Buster Bear had what
looked to Blacky very much like a tin pail hanging from his neck! No
wonder Sammy was excited. Blacky beat his wings fiercely and started
after Sammy. And so they reached the edge of the Green Forest, Buster Bear running as
hard as ever he could, Sammy Jay flying just behind him and screaming,
"Thief, thief, thief!" at the top of his lungs, and behind him Blacky
the Crow, trying to catch up and yelling as loud as he could, "Caw,
caw, caw! Come on, everybody! Come on! Come on!" Poor Buster! It was bad enough to be frightened almost to death as he
had been up in the Old Pasture when the pail had caught over his head
just as Farmer Brown's boy had yelled at him. Then to have the handle of
the pail slip down around his neck so that he couldn't get rid of the
pail but had to take it with him as he ran, was making a bad matter
worse.