6:10 Then
should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let
him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One. 6:11 What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end,
that I should prolong my life? 6:12 Is my strength the strength of
stones? or is my flesh of brass? 6:13 Is not my help in me? and is
wisdom driven quite from me? 6:14 To him that is afflicted pity
should be shewed from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the
Almighty. 6:15 My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream
of brooks they pass away; 6:16 Which are blackish by reason of the
ice, and wherein the snow is hid: 6:17 What time they wax warm, they
vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place. 6:18 The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and
perish. 6:19 The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for
them. 6:20 They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither,
and were ashamed. 6:21 For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid. 6:22 Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your
substance? 6:23 Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? or, Redeem me
from the hand of the mighty? 6:24 Teach me, and I will hold my
tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I have erred. 6:25 How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove? 6:26 Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is
desperate, which are as wind? 6:27 Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless,
and ye dig a pit for your friend. 6:28 Now therefore be content, look upon me; for it is evident unto
you if I lie. 6:29 Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my
righteousness is in it. 6:30 Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse
things? 7:1 Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not
his days also like the days of an hireling? 7:2 As a servant
earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling looketh for the
reward of his work: 7:3 So am I made to possess months of vanity, and
wearisome nights are appointed to me. 7:4 When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day. 7:5 My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is
broken, and become loathsome. 7:6 My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without
hope. 7:7 O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good. 7:8 The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes
are upon me, and I am not. 7:9 As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down
to the grave shall come up no more. 7:10 He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place
know him any more. 7:11 Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the
anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. 7:12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me? 7:13
When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaints; 7:14 Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me
through visions: 7:15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death
rather than my life. 7:16 I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days
are vanity. 7:17 What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou
shouldest set thine heart upon him? 7:18 And that thou shouldest
visit him every morning, and try him every moment? 7:19 How long wilt
thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my
spittle? 7:20 I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so
that I am a burden to myself? 7:21 And why dost thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away my iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the
dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be. 8:1 Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, 8:2 How long wilt thou
speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like
a strong wind? 8:3 Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty
pervert justice? 8:4 If thy children have sinned against him, and he
have cast them away for their transgression; 8:5 If thou wouldest seek
unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty; 8:6 If
thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and
make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. 8:7 Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
increase. 8:8 For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself
to the search of their fathers: 8:9 (For we are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:) 8:10 Shall
not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their
heart? 8:11 Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow
without water? 8:12 Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut
down, it withereth before any other herb. 8:13 So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite's hope
shall perish: 8:14 Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall
be a spider's web. 8:15 He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall
hold it fast, but it shall not endure. 8:16 He is green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his
garden. 8:17 His roots are wrapped about the heap, and seeth the place of
stones. 8:18 If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying,
I have not seen thee. 8:19 Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
others grow. 8:20 Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers: 8:21 Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and
thy lips with rejoicing. 8:22 They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling
place of the wicked shall come to nought. 9:1 Then Job answered and said, 9:2 I know it is so of a truth: but
how should man be just with God? 9:3 If he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand. 9:4 He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened
himself against him, and hath prospered? 9:5 Which removeth the
mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger. 9:6 Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble. 9:7 Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the
stars. 9:8 Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves
of the sea. 9:9 Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of
the south. 9:10 Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders
without number. 9:11 Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he passeth on also, but I
perceive him not. 9:12 Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto
him, What doest thou? 9:13 If God will not withdraw his anger, the
proud helpers do stoop under him. 9:14 How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to
reason with him? 9:15 Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not
answer, but I would make supplication to my judge. 9:16 If I had called, and he had answered me; yet would I not believe
that he had hearkened unto my voice. 9:17 For he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds
without cause. 9:18 He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with
bitterness. 9:19 If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who
shall set me a time to plead? 9:20 If I justify myself, mine own
mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse. 9:21 Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would
despise my life. 9:22 This is one thing, therefore I said it, He destroyeth the perfect
and the wicked. 9:23 If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the
innocent. 9:24 The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the
faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he? 9:25 Now
my days are swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good. 9:26 They are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that
hasteth to the prey. 9:27 If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my
heaviness, and comfort myself: 9:28 I am afraid of all my sorrows, I
know that thou wilt not hold me innocent. 9:29 If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain? 9:30 If I wash myself
with snow water, and make my hands never so clean; 9:31 Yet shalt thou
plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me. 9:32 For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we
should come together in judgment. 9:33 Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand
upon us both. 9:34 Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify
me: 9:35 Then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with
me. 10:1 My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon
myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.