And
Selim, one of these gentlemen will probably die tomorrow. Make
arrangements, please." The negro bowed and withdrew. Evan MacIan came out the next morning into the little garden to a
fresh silver day, his long face looking more austere than ever in
that cold light, his eyelids a little heavy. He carried one of
the swords. Turnbull was in the little house behind him,
demolishing the end of an early breakfast and humming a tune to
himself, which could be heard through the open window. A moment
or two later he leapt to his feet and came out into the sunlight,
still munching toast, his own sword stuck under his arm like a
walking-stick. Their eccentric host had vanished from sight, with a polite
gesture, some twenty minutes before. They imagined him to be
occupied on some concerns in the interior of the house, and they
waited for his emergence, stamping the garden in silence--the
garden of tall, fresh country flowers, in the midst of which the
monstrous South Sea idol lifted itself as abruptly as the prow of
a ship riding on a sea of red and white and gold. It was with a start, therefore, that they came upon the man
himself already in the garden. They were all the more startled
because of the still posture in which they found him. He was on
his knees in front of the stone idol, rigid and motionless, like
a saint in a trance or ecstasy. Yet when Turnbull's tread broke a
twig, he was on his feet in a flash. "Excuse me," he said with an irradiation of smiles, but yet with
a kind of bewilderment. "So sorry...family prayers...old
fashioned...mother's knee. Let us go on to the lawn behind." And he ducked rapidly round the statue to an open space of grass
on the other side of it. "This will do us best, Mr. MacIan," said he. Then he made a
gesture towards the heavy stone figure on the pedestal which had
now its blank and shapeless back turned towards them. "Don't you
be afraid," he added, "he can still see us." MacIan turned his blue, blinking eyes, which seemed still misty
with sleep (or sleeplessness) towards the idol, but his brows
drew together. The little man with the long hair also had his eyes on the back
view of the god. His eyes were at once liquid and burning, and he
rubbed his hands slowly against each other. "Do you know," he said, "I think he can see us better this way. I often think that this blank thing is his real face, watching,
though it cannot be watched. He! he! Yes, I think he looks nice
from behind. He looks more cruel from behind, don't you think?" "What the devil is the thing?" asked Turnbull gruffly. "It is the only Thing there is," answered the other. "It is
Force." "Oh!" said Turnbull shortly. "Yes, my friends," said the little man, with an animated
countenance, fluttering his fingers in the air, "it was no chance
that led you to this garden; surely it was the caprice of some
old god, some happy, pitiless god. Perhaps it was his will, for
he loves blood; and on that stone in front of him men have been
butchered by hundreds in the fierce, feasting islands of the
South. In this cursed, craven place I have not been permitted to
kill men on his altar. Only rabbits and cats, sometimes." In the stillness MacIan made a sudden movement, unmeaning
apparently, and then remained rigid. "But today, today," continued the small man in a shrill voice. "Today his hour is come. Today his will is done on earth as it
is in heaven. Men, men, men will bleed before him today." And
he bit his forefinger in a kind of fever. Still, the two duellists stood with their swords as heavily as
statues, and the silence seemed to cool the eccentric and call
him back to more rational speech. "Perhaps I express myself a little too lyrically," he said with
an amicable abruptness. "My philosophy has its higher ecstasies,
but perhaps you are hardly worked up to them yet. Let us confine
ourselves to the unquestioned. You have found your way,
gentlemen, by a beautiful accident, to the house of the only man
in England (probably) who will favour and encourage your most
reasonable project. From Cornwall to Cape Wrath this county is
one horrible, solid block of humanitarianism. You will find men
who will defend this or that war in a distant continent. They
will defend it on the contemptible ground of commerce or the more
contemptible ground of social good. But do not fancy that you
will find one other person who will comprehend a strong man
taking the sword in his hand and wiping out his enemy. My name
is Wimpey, Morrice Wimpey. I had a Fellowship at Magdalen. But I
assure you I had to drop it, owing to my having said something in
a public lecture infringing the popular prejudice against those
great gentlemen, the assassins of the Italian Renaissance. They
let me say it at dinner and so on, and seemed to like it. But in
a public lecture...so inconsistent. Well, as I say, here is your
only refuge and temple of honour. Here you can fall back on that
naked and awful arbitration which is the only thing that balances
the stars--a still, continuous violence. _Vae Victis!_  Down,
down, down with the defeated! Victory is the only ultimate fact. Carthage _was_ destroyed, the Red Indians are being exterminated:
that is the single certainty. In an hour from now that sun will
still be shining and that grass growing, and one of you will be
conquered; one of you will be the conqueror. When it has been
done, nothing will alter it. Heroes, I give you the hospitality
fit for heroes. And I salute the survivor. Fall on!" The two men took their swords. Then MacIan said steadily: "Mr.
Turnbull, lend me your sword a moment." Turnbull, with a questioning glance, handed him the weapon. MacIan took the second sword in his left hand and, with a violent
gesture, hurled it at the feet of little Mr. Wimpey. "Fight!" he said in a loud, harsh voice. "Fight me now!" Wimpey took a step backward, and bewildered words bubbled on his
lips. "Pick up that sword and fight me," repeated MacIan, with brows as
black as thunder. The little man turned to Turnbull with a gesture, demanding
judgement or protection. "Really, sir," he began, "this gentleman confuses..."

"You stinking little coward," roared Turnbull, suddenly releasing
his wrath. "Fight, if you're so fond of fighting! Fight, if
you're so fond of all that filthy philosophy! If winning is
everything, go in and win! If the weak must go to the wall, go to
the wall! Fight, you rat! Fight, or if you won't fight--run!" And he ran at Wimpey, with blazing eyes. Wimpey staggered back a few paces like a man struggling with his
own limbs. Then he felt the furious Scotchman coming at him like
an express train, doubling his size every second, with eyes as
big as windows and a sword as bright as the sun. Something broke
inside him, and he found himself running away, tumbling over his
own feet in terror, and crying out as he ran. "Chase him!" shouted Turnbull as MacIan snatched up the sword and
joined in the scamper. "Chase him over a county! Chase him into
the sea! Shoo! Shoo! Shoo!" The little man plunged like a rabbit among the tall flowers, the
two duellists after him. Turnbull kept at his tail with savage
ecstasy, still shooing him like a cat. But MacIan, as he ran past
the South Sea idol, paused an instant to spring upon its
pedestal.