Cicero is dead, and by that order of proscription
Had you your Letters from your wife, my Lord? Bru. No Messala

   Messa. Nor nothing in your Letters writ of her? Bru. Nothing Messala

   Messa. That me thinkes is strange

   Bru. Why aske you? Heare you ought of her, in yours? Messa. No my Lord

   Bru. Now as you are a Roman tell me true

   Messa. Then like a Roman, beare the truth I tell,
For certaine she is dead, and by strange manner

   Bru. Why farewell Portia: We must die Messala:
With meditating that she must dye once,
I haue the patience to endure it now

   Messa. Euen so great men, great losses shold indure

   Cassi. I haue as much of this in Art as you,
But yet my Nature could not beare it so

   Bru. Well, to our worke aliue. What do you thinke
Of marching to Philippi presently

   Cassi. I do not thinke it good

   Bru. Your reason? Cassi. This it is:
'Tis better that the Enemie seeke vs,
So shall he waste his meanes, weary his Souldiers,
Doing himselfe offence, whil'st we lying still,
Are full of rest, defence, and nimblenesse

   Bru. Good reasons must of force giue place to better:
The people 'twixt Philippi, and this ground
Do stand but in a forc'd affection:
For they haue grug'd vs Contribution. The Enemy, marching along by them,
By them shall make a fuller number vp,
Come on refresht, new added, and encourag'd:
From which aduantage shall we cut him off. If at Philippi we do face him there,
These people at our backe

   Cassi. Heare me good Brother

   Bru. Vnder your pardon. You must note beside,
That we haue tride the vtmost of our Friends:
Our Legions are brim full, our cause is ripe,
The Enemy encreaseth euery day,
We at the height, are readie to decline. There is a Tide in the affayres of men,
Which taken at the Flood, leades on to Fortune:
Omitted, all the voyage of their life,
Is bound in Shallowes, and in Miseries. On such a full Sea are we now a-float,
And we must take the current when it serues,
Or loose our Ventures

   Cassi. Then with your will go on: wee'l along
Our selues, and meet them at Philippi

   Bru. The deepe of night is crept vpon our talke,
And Nature must obey Necessitie,
Which we will niggard with a little rest:
There is no more to say

   Cassi. No more, good night,
Early to morrow will we rise, and hence. Enter Lucius. Bru. Lucius my Gowne: farewell good Messala,
Good night Titinius: Noble, Noble Cassius,
Good night, and good repose

   Cassi. O my deere Brother:
This was an ill beginning of the night:
Neuer come such diuision 'tweene our soules:
Let it not Brutus. Enter Lucius with the Gowne. Bru. Euery thing is well

   Cassi. Good night my Lord

   Bru. Good night good Brother

   Tit. Messa. Good night Lord Brutus

   Bru. Farwell euery one. Exeunt. Giue me the Gowne. Where is thy Instrument? Luc. Heere in the Tent

   Bru. What, thou speak'st drowsily? Poore knaue I blame thee not, thou art ore-watch'd. Call Claudio, and some other of my men,
Ile haue them sleepe on Cushions in my Tent

   Luc. Varrus, and Claudio. Enter Varrus and Claudio. Var. Cals my Lord? Bru. I pray you sirs, lye in my Tent and sleepe,
It may be I shall raise you by and by
On businesse to my Brother Cassius

   Var. So please you, we will stand,
And watch your pleasure

   Bru. I will it not haue it so: Lye downe good sirs,
It may be I shall otherwise bethinke me. Looke Lucius, heere's the booke I sought for so:
I put it in the pocket of my Gowne

   Luc. I was sure your Lordship did not giue it me

   Bru. Beare with me good Boy, I am much forgetfull. Canst thou hold vp thy heauie eyes a-while,
And touch thy Instrument a straine or two

   Luc. I my Lord, an't please you

   Bru. It does my Boy:
I trouble thee too much, but thou art willing

   Luc. It is my duty Sir

   Brut. I should not vrge thy duty past thy might,
I know yong bloods looke for a time of rest

   Luc. I haue slept my Lord already

   Bru. It was well done, and thou shalt sleepe againe:
I will not hold thee long. If I do liue,
I will be good to thee. Musicke, and a Song. This is a sleepy Tune: O Murd'rous slumber! Layest thou thy Leaden Mace vpon my Boy,
That playes thee Musicke? Gentle knaue good night:
I will not do thee so much wrong to wake thee:
If thou do'st nod, thou break'st thy Instrument,
Ile take it from thee, and (good Boy) good night. Let me see, let me see; is not the Leafe turn'd downe
Where I left reading? Heere it is I thinke. Enter the Ghost of Caesar. How ill this Taper burnes. Ha! Who comes heere? I thinke it is the weakenesse of mine eyes
That shapes this monstrous Apparition. It comes vpon me: Art thou any thing? Art thou some God, some Angell, or some Diuell,
That mak'st my blood cold, and my haire to stare? Speake to me, what thou art

   Ghost. Thy euill Spirit Brutus? Bru. Why com'st thou? Ghost. To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi

   Brut. Well: then I shall see thee againe? Ghost. I, at Philippi

   Brut. Why I will see thee at Philippi then:
Now I haue taken heart, thou vanishest. Ill Spirit, I would hold more talke with thee. Boy, Lucius, Varrus, Claudio, Sirs: Awake:
Claudio

   Luc. The strings my Lord, are false

   Bru. He thinkes he still is at his Instrument. Lucius, awake

   Luc.