Come,
deale iustly with me: come, come; nay speake

   Guil. What should we say my Lord? Ham. Why any thing. But to the purpose; you were
sent for; and there is a kinde confession in your lookes;
which your modesties haue not craft enough to color,
I know the good King & Queene haue sent for you

   Rosin. To what end my Lord? Ham. That you must teach me: but let mee coniure
you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of
our youth, by the Obligation of our euer-preserued loue,
and by what more deare, a better proposer could charge
you withall; be euen and direct with me, whether you
were sent for or no

   Rosin. What say you? Ham. Nay then I haue an eye of you: if you loue me
hold not off

   Guil. My Lord, we were sent for

   Ham. I will tell you why; so shall my anticipation
preuent your discouery of your secricie to the King and
Queene: moult no feather, I haue of late, but wherefore
I know not, lost all my mirth, forgone all custome of exercise;
and indeed, it goes so heauenly with my disposition;
that this goodly frame the Earth, seemes to me a sterrill
Promontory; this most excellent Canopy the Ayre,
look you, this braue ore-hanging, this Maiesticall Roofe,
fretted with golden fire: why, it appeares no other thing
to mee, then a foule and pestilent congregation of vapours. What a piece of worke is a man! how Noble in
Reason? how infinite in faculty? in forme and mouing
how expresse and admirable? in Action, how like an Angel? in apprehension, how like a God? the beauty of the
world, the Parragon of Animals; and yet to me, what is
this Quintessence of Dust? Man delights not me; no,
nor Woman neither; though by your smiling you seeme
to say so

   Rosin. My Lord, there was no such stuffe in my
thoughts

   Ham. Why did you laugh, when I said, Man delights
not me? Rosin. To thinke, my Lord, if you delight not in Man,
what Lenton entertainment the Players shall receiue
from you: wee coated them on the way, and hither are
they comming to offer you Seruice

   Ham. He that playes the King shall be welcome; his
Maiesty shall haue Tribute of mee: the aduenturous
Knight shal vse his Foyle and Target: the Louer shall
not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his part in
peace: the Clowne shall make those laugh whose lungs
are tickled a'th' sere: and the Lady shall say her minde
freely; or the blanke Verse shall halt for't: what Players
are they? Rosin. Euen those you were wont to take delight in
the Tragedians of the City

   Ham. How chances it they trauaile? their residence
both in reputation and profit was better both
wayes

   Rosin. I thinke their Inhibition comes by the meanes
of the late Innouation? Ham. Doe they hold the same estimation they did
when I was in the City? Are they so follow'd? Rosin. No indeed, they are not

   Ham. How comes it? doe they grow rusty? Rosin. Nay, their indeauour keepes in the wonted
pace; But there is Sir an ayrie of Children, little
Yases, that crye out on the top of question; and
are most tyrannically clap't for't: these are now the
fashion, and so be-ratled the common Stages (so they
call them) that many wearing Rapiers, are affraide of
Goose-quils, and dare scarse come thither

   Ham. What are they Children? Who maintains 'em? How are they escorted? Will they pursue the Quality no
longer then they can sing? Will they not say afterwards
if they should grow themselues to common Players (as
it is most like if their meanes are not better) their Writers
do them wrong, to make them exclaim against their
owne Succession

   Rosin. Faith there ha's bene much to do on both sides:
and the Nation holds it no sinne, to tarre them to Controuersie. There was for a while, no mony bid for argument,
vnlesse the Poet and the Player went to Cuffes in
the Question

   Ham. Is't possible? Guild. Oh there ha's beene much throwing about of
Braines

   Ham. Do the Boyes carry it away? Rosin. I that they do my Lord. Hercules & his load too

   Ham. It is not strange: for mine Vnckle is King of
Denmarke, and those that would make mowes at him
while my Father liued; giue twenty, forty, an hundred
Ducates a peece, for his picture in Little. There is something
in this more then Naturall, if Philosophie could
finde it out. Flourish for the Players. Guil. There are the Players

   Ham. Gentlemen, you are welcom to Elsonower: your
hands, come: The appurtenance of Welcome, is Fashion
and Ceremony. Let me comply with you in the Garbe,
lest my extent to the Players (which I tell you must shew
fairely outward) should more appeare like entertainment
then yours. You are welcome: but my Vnckle Father,
and Aunt Mother are deceiu'd

   Guil. In what my deere Lord? Ham. I am but mad North, North-West: when the
Winde is Southerly, I know a Hawke from a Handsaw. Enter Polonius. Pol. Well be with you Gentlemen

   Ham. Hearke you Guildensterne, and you too: at each
eare a hearer: that great Baby you see there, is not yet
out of his swathing clouts

   Rosin. Happily he's the second time come to them: for
they say, an old man is twice a childe

   Ham. I will Prophesie. Hee comes to tell me of the
Players. Mark it, you say right Sir: for a Monday morning
'twas so indeed

   Pol. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you

   Ham. My Lord, I haue Newes to tell you. When Rossius an Actor in Rome-
  Pol. The Actors are come hither my Lord

   Ham. Buzze, buzze

   Pol. Vpon mine Honor

   Ham. Then can each Actor on his Asse-
  Polon. The best Actors in the world, either for Tragedie,
Comedie, Historie, Pastorall:
Pastoricall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Tragicall-Historicall: Tragicall-Comicall-Historicall-Pastorall:
Scene indiuidible: or Poem
vnlimited. Seneca cannot be too heauy, nor Plautus
too light, for the law of Writ, and the Liberty. These are
the onely men

   Ham. O Iephta Iudge of Israel, what a Treasure had'st
thou? Pol. What a Treasure had he, my Lord? Ham. Why one faire Daughter, and no more,
The which he loued passing well

   Pol. Still on my Daughter

   Ham. Am I not i'th' right old Iephta? Polon. If you call me Iephta my Lord, I haue a daughter
that I loue passing well

   Ham. Nay that followes not

   Polon. What followes then, my Lord? Ha. Why, As by lot, God wot: and then you know, It
came to passe, as most like it was: The first rowe of the
Pons Chanson will shew you more. For looke where my
Abridgements come. Enter foure or fiue Players. Y'are welcome Masters, welcome all. I am glad to see
thee well: Welcome good Friends.