So this morning he only went far enough to
make sure that if Little Joe were watching for him, as he was sure he
would be, he would see him coming. Then, instead of keeping on to the
little pool, he hurried to a place way down the Laughing Brook, where
the water was very shallow, hardly over his feet, and there he sat
chuckling to himself. Things happened just as he had expected. The
frightened fish Little Joe chased out of the little pools up above swam
down the Laughing Brook, because, you know, Little Joe was behind them,
and there was nowhere else for them to go. When they came to the place
where Buster was waiting, all he had to do was to scoop them out on to
the bank. It was great fun. It didn't take Buster long to catch all the
fish he could eat. Then he saved a nice fat trout and waited. By and by along came Little Joe Otter, chuckling to think how he had
spoiled Buster Bear's fishing. He was so intent on looking behind him to
see if Buster was coming that he didn't see Buster waiting there until
he spoke. "I'm much obliged for the fine breakfast you have given me," said Buster
in his deepest, most grumbly-rumbly voice. "I've saved a fat trout for
you to make up for the one I ate yesterday. I hope we'll go fishing
together often." Then he went off laughing fit to kill himself. Little Joe couldn't find
a word to say. He was so surprised and angry that he went off by himself
and sulked. And Billy Mink, who had been watching, ate the fat trout. V

GRANDFATHER FROG'S COMMON-SENSE


There is nothing quite like common sense to smooth out troubles. People
who have plenty of just plain common sense are often thought to be very
wise. Their neighbors look up to them and are forever running to them
for advice, and they are very much respected. That is the way with
Grandfather Frog. He is very old and very wise. Anyway, that is what his
neighbors think. The truth is, he simply has a lot of common sense,
which after all is the very best kind of wisdom. Now when Little Joe Otter found that Buster Bear had been too smart for
him and that instead of spoiling Buster's fishing in the Laughing Brook
he had really made it easier for Buster to catch all the fish he wanted,
Little Joe went off down to the Smiling Pool in a great rage. Billy Mink stopped long enough to eat the fat fish Buster had left on
the bank and then he too went down to the Smiling Pool. When Little Joe Otter and Billy Mink reached the Smiling Pool, they
climbed up on the Big Rock, and there Little Joe sulked and sulked,
until finally Grandfather Frog asked what the matter was. Little Joe
wouldn't tell, but Billy Mink told the whole story. When he told how
Buster had been too smart for Little Joe, it tickled him so that Billy
had to laugh in spite of himself. So did Grandfather Frog. So did Jerry
Muskrat, who had been listening. Of course this made Little Joe angrier
than ever. He said a lot of unkind things about Buster Bear and about
Billy Mink and Grandfather Frog and Jerry Muskrat, because they had
laughed at the smartness of Buster. "He's nothing but a great big bully and thief!" declared Little Joe. "Chug-a-rum! He may be a bully, because great big people are very apt to
be bullies, and though I haven't seen him, I guess Buster Bear is big
enough from all I have heard, but I don't see how he is a thief," said
Grandfather Frog. "Didn't he catch my fish and eat them?" snapped Little Joe. "Doesn't
that make him a thief?" "They were no more your fish than mine," protested Billy Mink. "Well, _our_ fish, then! He stole _our_ fish, if you like that any
better. That makes him just as much a thief, doesn't it?" growled
Little Joe. Grandfather Frog looked up at jolly, round, bright Mr. Sun and slowly
winked one of his great, goggly eyes. "There comes a foolish green fly,"
said he. "Who does he belong to?" "Nobody!" snapped Little Joe. "What have foolish green flies got to do
with my--I mean _our_ fish?" "Nothing, nothing at all," replied Grandfather Frog mildly. "I was just
hoping that he would come near enough for me to snap him up; then he
would belong to me. As long as he doesn't, he doesn't belong to any one. I suppose that if Buster Bear should happen along and catch him, he
would be stealing from me, according to Little Joe." "Of course not! What a silly idea! You're getting foolish in your old
age," retorted Little Joe. "Can you tell me the difference between the fish that you haven't caught
and the foolish green flies that I haven't caught?" asked Grandfather
Frog. Little Joe couldn't find a word to say. "You take my advice, Little Joe Otter," continued Grandfather Frog, "and
always make friends with those who are bigger and stronger and smarter
than you are. You'll find it pays." [Illustration: "You take my advice, Little Joe Otter," continued
Grandfather Frog. _Page 26._]




VI

LITTLE JOE OTTER TAKES GRANDFATHER FROG'S ADVICE


  Who makes an enemy a friend,
  To fear and worry puts an end. Little Joe Otter found that out when he took Grandfather Frog's advice. He wouldn't have admitted that he was afraid of Buster Bear. No one ever
likes to admit being afraid, least of all Little Joe Otter. And really
Little Joe has a great deal of courage. Very few of the little people of
the Green Forest or the Green Meadows would willingly quarrel with him,
for Little Joe is a great fighter when he has to fight. As for all those
who live in or along the Laughing Brook or in the Smiling Pool, they
let Little Joe have his own way in everything. Now having one's own way too much is a bad thing. It is apt to make one
selfish and thoughtless of other people and very hard to get along with. Little Joe Otter had his way too much. Grandfather Frog knew it and
shook his head very soberly when Little Joe had been disrespectful to
him. "Too bad. Too bad! Too bad! Chug-a-rum! It is too bad that such a fine
young fellow as Little Joe should spoil a good disposition by such
selfish heedlessness. Too bad," said he. So, though he didn't let on that it was so, Grandfather Frog really was
delighted when he heard how Buster Bear had been too smart for Little
Joe Otter. It tickled him so that he had hard work to keep a straight
face. But he did and was as grave and solemn as you please as he
advised Little Joe always to make friends with any one who was bigger
and stronger and smarter than he. That was good common sense advice, but
Little Joe just sniffed and went off declaring that he would get even
with Buster Bear yet. Now Little Joe is good-natured and full of fun as
a rule, and after he had reached home and his temper had cooled off a
little, he began to see the joke on himself,--how when he had worked so
hard to frighten the fish in the little pools of the Laughing Brook so
that Buster Bear should not catch any, he had all the time been driving
them right into Buster's paws. By and by he grinned. It was a little
sheepish grin at first, but at last it grew into a laugh. "I believe," said Little Joe as he wiped tears of laughter from his
eyes, "that Grandfather Frog is right, and that the best thing I can do
is to make friends with Buster Bear. I'll try it to-morrow morning." So very early the next morning Little Joe Otter went to the best fishing
pool he knew of in the Laughing Brook, and there he caught the biggest
trout he could find. It was so big and fat that it made Little Joe's
mouth water, for you know fat trout are his favorite food. But he didn't
take so much as one bite. Instead he carefully laid it on an old log
where Buster Bear would be sure to see it if he should come along that
way. Then he hid near by, where he could watch. Buster was late that
morning. It seemed to Little Joe that he never would come. Once he
nearly lost the fish. He had turned his head for just a minute, and when
he looked back again, the trout was nowhere to be seen. Buster couldn't
have stolen up and taken it, because such a big fellow couldn't possibly
have gotten out of sight again.