Mediums

They shall arise in the States,
They shall report Nature, laws, physiology, and happiness,
They shall illustrate Democracy and the kosmos,
They shall be alimentive, amative, perceptive,
They shall be complete women and men, their pose brawny and supple,
    their drink water, their blood clean and clear,
They shall fully enjoy materialism and the sight of products, they
    shall enjoy the sight of the beef, lumber, bread-stuffs, of
    Chicago the great city. They shall train themselves to go in public to become orators and
    oratresses,
Strong and sweet shall their tongues be, poems and materials of
    poems shall come from their lives, they shall be makers and finders,
Of them and of their works shall emerge divine conveyers, to convey gospels,
Characters, events, retrospections, shall be convey'd in gospels,
    trees, animals, waters, shall be convey'd,
Death, the future, the invisible faith, shall all be convey'd.



} Weave in, My Hardy Life

Weave in, weave in, my hardy life,
Weave yet a soldier strong and full for great campaigns to come,
Weave in red blood, weave sinews in like ropes, the senses, sight weave in,
Weave lasting sure, weave day and night the wet, the warp, incessant
    weave, tire not,
(We know not what the use O life, nor know the aim, the end, nor
    really aught we know,
But know the work, the need goes on and shall go on, the
    death-envelop'd march of peace as well as war goes on,)
For great campaigns of peace the same the wiry threads to weave,
We know not why or what, yet weave, forever weave.



} Spain, 1873-74

Out of the murk of heaviest clouds,
Out of the feudal wrecks and heap'd-up skeletons of kings,
Out of that old entire European debris, the shatter'd mummeries,
Ruin'd cathedrals, crumble of palaces, tombs of priests,
Lo, Freedom's features fresh undimm'd look forth--the same immortal
    face looks forth;
(A glimpse as of thy Mother's face Columbia,
A flash significant as of a sword,
Beaming towards thee.) Nor think we forget thee maternal;
Lag'd'st thou so long? shall the clouds close again upon thee? Ah, but thou hast thyself now appear'd to us--we know thee,
Thou hast given us a sure proof, the glimpse of thyself,
Thou waitest there as everywhere thy time.



} By Broad Potomac's Shore

By broad Potomac's shore, again old tongue,
(Still uttering, still ejaculating, canst never cease this babble?) Again old heart so gay, again to you, your sense, the full flush
    spring returning,
Again the freshness and the odors, again Virginia's summer sky,
    pellucid blue and silver,
Again the forenoon purple of the hills,
Again the deathless grass, so noiseless soft and green,
Again the blood-red roses blooming. Perfume this book of mine O blood-red roses! Lave subtly with your waters every line Potomac! Give me of you O spring, before I close, to put between its pages! O forenoon purple of the hills, before I close, of you! O deathless grass, of you!



} From Far Dakota's Canyons  [June 25, 1876]

From far Dakota's canyons,
Lands of the wild ravine, the dusky Sioux, the lonesome stretch, the
    silence,
Haply to-day a mournful wall, haply a trumpet-note for heroes. The battle-bulletin,
The Indian ambuscade, the craft, the fatal environment,
The cavalry companies fighting to the last in sternest heroism,
In the midst of their little circle, with their slaughter'd horses
    for breastworks,
The fall of Custer and all his officers and men. Continues yet the old, old legend of our race,
The loftiest of life upheld by death,
The ancient banner perfectly maintain'd,
O lesson opportune, O how I welcome thee! As sitting in dark days,
Lone, sulky, through the time's thick murk looking in vain for
    light, for hope,
From unsuspected parts a fierce and momentary proof,
(The sun there at the centre though conceal'd,
Electric life forever at the centre,)
Breaks forth a lightning flash. Thou of the tawny flowing hair in battle,
I erewhile saw, with erect head, pressing ever in front, bearing a
    bright sword in thy hand,
Now ending well in death the splendid fever of thy deeds,
(I bring no dirge for it or thee, I bring a glad triumphal sonnet,)
Desperate and glorious, aye in defeat most desperate, most glorious,
After thy many battles in which never yielding up a gun or a color,
Leaving behind thee a memory sweet to soldiers,
Thou yieldest up thyself.



} Old War-Dreams

In midnight sleep of many a face of anguish,
Of the look at first of the mortally wounded, (of that indescribable look,)
Of the dead on their backs with arms extended wide,
     I dream, I dream, I dream. Of scenes of Nature, fields and mountains,
Of skies so beauteous after a storm, and at night the moon so
    unearthly bright,
Shining sweetly, shining down, where we dig the trenches and
    gather the heaps,
     I dream, I dream, I dream. Long have they pass'd, faces and trenches and fields,
Where through the carnage I moved with a callous composure, or away
    from the fallen,
Onward I sped at the time--but now of their forms at night,
     I dream, I dream, I dream.



} Thick-Sprinkled Bunting

Thick-sprinkled bunting! flag of stars! Long yet your road, fateful flag--long yet your road, and lined with
    bloody death,
For the prize I see at issue at last is the world,
All its ships and shores I see interwoven with your threads greedy banner;
Dream'd again the flags of kings, highest borne to flaunt unrival'd? O hasten flag of man--O with sure and steady step, passing highest
    flags of kings,
Walk supreme to the heavens mighty symbol--run up above them all,
Flag of stars! thick-sprinkled bunting!



} What Best I See in Thee
[To U. S. G. return'd from his World's Tour]

What best I see in thee,
Is not that where thou mov'st down history's great highways,
Ever undimm'd by time shoots warlike victory's dazzle,
Or that thou sat'st where Washington sat, ruling the land in peace,
Or thou the man whom feudal Europe feted, venerable Asia swarm'd upon,
Who walk'd with kings with even pace the round world's promenade;
But that in foreign lands, in all thy walks with kings,
Those prairie sovereigns of the West, Kansas, Missouri, Illinois,
Ohio's, Indiana's millions, comrades, farmers, soldiers, all to the front,
Invisibly with thee walking with kings with even pace the round
    world's promenade,
Were all so justified.



} Spirit That Form'd This Scene 
[Written in Platte Canyon, Colorado]

Spirit that form'd this scene,
These tumbled rock-piles grim and red,
These reckless heaven-ambitious peaks,
These gorges, turbulent-clear streams, this naked freshness,
These formless wild arrays, for reasons of their own,
I know thee, savage spirit--we have communed together,
Mine too such wild arrays, for reasons of their own;
Wast charged against my chants they had forgotten art? To fuse within themselves its rules precise and delicatesse? The lyrist's measur'd beat, the wrought-out temple's grace--column
    and polish'd arch forgot? But thou that revelest here--spirit that form'd this scene,
They have remember'd thee.



} As I Walk These Broad Majestic Days

As I walk these broad majestic days of peace,
(For the war, the struggle of blood finish'd, wherein, O terrific Ideal,
Against vast odds erewhile having gloriously won,
Now thou stridest on, yet perhaps in time toward denser wars,
Perhaps to engage in time in still more dreadful contests, dangers,
Longer campaigns and crises, labors beyond all others,)
Around me I hear that eclat of the world, politics, produce,
The announcements of recognized things, science,
The approved growth of cities and the spread of inventions. I see the ships, (they will last a few years,)
The vast factories with their foremen and workmen,
And hear the indorsement of all, and do not object to it. But I too announce solid things,
Science, ships, politics, cities, factories, are not nothing,
Like a grand procession to music of distant bugles pouring,
    triumphantly moving, and grander heaving in sight,
They stand for realities--all is as it should be. Then my realities;
What else is so real as mine? Libertad and the divine average, freedom to every slave on the face
    of the earth,
The rapt promises and lumine of seers, the spiritual world, these
    centuries-lasting songs,
And our visions, the visions of poets, the most solid announcements
    of any.



} A Clear Midnight

This is thy hour O Soul, thy free flight into the wordless,
Away from books, away from art, the day erased, the lesson done,
Thee fully forth emerging, silent, gazing, pondering the themes thou
    lovest best,
Night, sleep, death and the stars. [BOOK XXXIII. SONGS OF PARTING]

}  As the Time Draws Nigh

As the time draws nigh glooming a cloud,
A dread beyond of I know not what darkens me. I shall go forth,
I shall traverse the States awhile, but I cannot tell whither or how long,
Perhaps soon some day or night while I am singing my voice will
    suddenly cease. O book, O chants! must all then amount to but this? Must we barely arrive at this beginning of us? --and yet it is
    enough, O soul;
O soul, we have positively appear'd--that is enough.



} Years of the Modern

Years of the modern! years of the unperform'd! Your horizon rises, I see it parting away for more august dramas,
I see not America only, not only Liberty's nation but other nations
    preparing,
I see tremendous entrances and exits, new combinations, the solidarity
    of races,
I see that force advancing with irresistible power on the world's stage,
(Have the old forces, the old wars, played their parts? are the acts
    suitable to them closed?) I see Freedom, completely arm'd and victorious and very haughty,
    with Law on one side and Peace on the other,
A stupendous trio all issuing forth against the idea of caste;
What historic denouements are these we so rapidly approach? I see men marching and countermarching by swift millions,
I see the frontiers and boundaries of the old aristocracies broken,
I see the landmarks of European kings removed,
I see this day the People beginning their landmarks, (all others give way;)
Never were such sharp questions ask'd as this day,
Never was average man, his soul, more energetic, more like a God,
Lo, how he urges and urges, leaving the masses no rest! His daring foot is on land and sea everywhere, he colonizes the
    Pacific, the archipelagoes,
With the steamship, the electric telegraph, the newspaper, the
    wholesale engines of war,
With these and the world-spreading factories he interlinks all
    geography, all lands;
What whispers are these O lands, running ahead of you, passing under
    the seas? Are all nations communing? is there going to be but one heart to the globe? Is humanity forming en-masse? for lo, tyrants tremble, crowns grow dim,
The earth, restive, confronts a new era, perhaps a general divine war,
No one knows what will happen next, such portents fill the days and nights;
Years prophetical! the space ahead as I walk, as I vainly try to
    pierce it, is full of phantoms,
Unborn deeds, things soon to be, project their shapes around me,
This incredible rush and heat, this strange ecstatic fever of dreams
    O years! Your dreams O years, how they penetrate through me! (I know not
    whether I sleep or wake;)
The perform'd America and Europe grow dim, retiring in shadow behind me,
The unperform'd, more gigantic than ever, advance, advance upon me.



} Ashes of Soldiers

Ashes of soldiers South or North,
As I muse retrospective murmuring a chant in thought,
The war resumes, again to my sense your shapes,
And again the advance of the armies. Noiseless as mists and vapors,
From their graves in the trenches ascending,
From cemeteries all through Virginia and Tennessee,
From every point of the compass out of the countless graves,
In wafted clouds, in myriads large, or squads of twos or threes or
    single ones they come,
And silently gather round me. Now sound no note O trumpeters,
Not at the head of my cavalry parading on spirited horses,
With sabres drawn and glistening, and carbines by their thighs, (ah
    my brave horsemen! My handsome tan-faced horsemen! what life, what joy and pride,
With all the perils were yours.) Nor you drummers, neither at reveille at dawn,
Nor the long roll alarming the camp, nor even the muffled beat for burial,
Nothing from you this time O drummers bearing my warlike drums. But aside from these and the marts of wealth and the crowded promenade,
Admitting around me comrades close unseen by the rest and voiceless,
The slain elate and alive again, the dust and debris alive,
I chant this chant of my silent soul in the name of all dead soldiers. Faces so pale with wondrous eyes, very dear, gather closer yet,
Draw close, but speak not. Phantoms of countless lost,
Invisible to the rest henceforth become my companions,
Follow me ever--desert me not while I live. Sweet are the blooming cheeks of the living--sweet are the musical
    voices sounding,
But sweet, ah sweet, are the dead with their silent eyes. Dearest comrades, all is over and long gone,
But love is not over--and what love, O comrades! Perfume from battle-fields rising, up from the foetor arising. Perfume therefore my chant, O love, immortal love,
Give me to bathe the memories of all dead soldiers,
Shroud them, embalm them, cover them all over with tender pride. Perfume all--make all wholesome,
Make these ashes to nourish and blossom,
O love, solve all, fructify all with the last chemistry. Give me exhaustless, make me a fountain,
That I exhale love from me wherever I go like a moist perennial dew,
For the ashes of all dead soldiers South or North.



} Thoughts

     1
Of these years I sing,
How they pass and have pass'd through convuls'd pains, as through
    parturitions,
How America illustrates birth, muscular youth, the promise, the sure
    fulfilment, the absolute success, despite of people--illustrates
    evil as well as good,
The vehement struggle so fierce for unity in one's-self,
How many hold despairingly yet to the models departed, caste, myths,
    obedience, compulsion, and to infidelity,
How few see the arrived models, the athletes, the Western States, or
    see freedom or spirituality, or hold any faith in results,
(But I see the athletes, and I see the results of the war glorious
    and inevitable, and they again leading to other results.) How the great cities appear--how the Democratic masses, turbulent,
    willful, as I love them,
How the whirl, the contest, the wrestle of evil with good, the
    sounding and resounding, keep on and on,
How society waits unform'd, and is for a while between things ended
    and things begun,
How America is the continent of glories, and of the triumph of
    freedom and of the Democracies, and of the fruits of society, and
    of all that is begun,
And how the States are complete in themselves--and how all triumphs
    and glories are complete in themselves, to lead onward,
And how these of mine and of the States will in their turn be
    convuls'd, and serve other parturitions and transitions,
And how all people, sights, combinations, the democratic masses too,
    serve--and how every fact, and war itself, with all its horrors,
    serves,
And how now or at any time each serves the exquisite transition of death. 2
Of seeds dropping into the ground, of births,
Of the steady concentration of America, inland, upward, to
    impregnable and swarming places,
Of what Indiana, Kentucky, Arkansas, and the rest, are to be,
Of what a few years will show there in Nebraska, Colorado, Nevada,
    and the rest,
(Or afar, mounting the Northern Pacific to Sitka or Aliaska,)
Of what the feuillage of America is the preparation for--and of what
    all sights, North, South, East and West, are,
Of this Union welded in blood, of the solemn price paid, of the
    unnamed lost ever present in my mind;
Of the temporary use of materials for identity's sake,
Of the present, passing, departing--of the growth of completer men
    than any yet,
Of all sloping down there where the fresh free giver the mother, the
    Mississippi flows,
Of mighty inland cities yet unsurvey'd and unsuspected,
Of the new and good names, of the modern developments, of
    inalienable homesteads,
Of a free and original life there, of simple diet and clean and
    sweet blood,
Of litheness, majestic faces, clear eyes, and perfect physique there,
Of immense spiritual results future years far West, each side of the
    Anahuacs,
Of these songs, well understood there, (being made for that area,)
Of the native scorn of grossness and gain there,
(O it lurks in me night and day--what is gain after all to savageness
    and freedom?) }  Song at Sunset

Splendor of ended day floating and filling me,
Hour prophetic, hour resuming the past,
Inflating my throat, you divine average,
You earth and life till the last ray gleams I sing. Open mouth of my soul uttering gladness,
Eyes of my soul seeing perfection,
Natural life of me faithfully praising things,
Corroborating forever the triumph of things. Illustrious every one! Illustrious what we name space, sphere of unnumber'd spirits,
Illustrious the mystery of motion in all beings, even the tiniest insect,
Illustrious the attribute of speech, the senses, the body,
Illustrious the passing light--illustrious the pale reflection on
    the new moon in the western sky,
Illustrious whatever I see or hear or touch, to the last. Good in all,
In the satisfaction and aplomb of animals,
In the annual return of the seasons,
In the hilarity of youth,
In the strength and flush of manhood,
In the grandeur and exquisiteness of old age,
In the superb vistas of death. Wonderful to depart! Wonderful to be here! The heart, to jet the all-alike and innocent blood! To breathe the air, how delicious! To speak--to walk--to seize something by the hand! To prepare for sleep, for bed, to look on my rose-color'd flesh! To be conscious of my body, so satisfied, so large! To be this incredible God I am! To have gone forth among other Gods, these men and women I love. Wonderful how I celebrate you and myself
How my thoughts play subtly at the spectacles around! How the clouds pass silently overhead! How the earth darts on and on! and how the sun, moon, stars, dart on and on! How the water sports and sings! (surely it is alive!) How the trees rise and stand up, with strong trunks, with branches
    and leaves! (Surely there is something more in each of the trees, some living soul.) O amazement of things--even the least particle!