"Today his hour is come. Today his will is done on earth as it
is in heaven. Men, men, men will bleed before him today." And
he bit his forefinger in a kind of fever. Still, the two duellists stood with their swords as heavily as
statues, and the silence seemed to cool the eccentric and call
him back to more rational speech. "Perhaps I express myself a little too lyrically," he said with
an amicable abruptness. "My philosophy has its higher ecstasies,
but perhaps you are hardly worked up to them yet. Let us confine
ourselves to the unquestioned. You have found your way,
gentlemen, by a beautiful accident, to the house of the only man
in England (probably) who will favour and encourage your most
reasonable project. From Cornwall to Cape Wrath this county is
one horrible, solid block of humanitarianism. You will find men
who will defend this or that war in a distant continent. They
will defend it on the contemptible ground of commerce or the more
contemptible ground of social good. But do not fancy that you
will find one other person who will comprehend a strong man
taking the sword in his hand and wiping out his enemy. My name
is Wimpey, Morrice Wimpey. I had a Fellowship at Magdalen. But I
assure you I had to drop it, owing to my having said something in
a public lecture infringing the popular prejudice against those
great gentlemen, the assassins of the Italian Renaissance. They
let me say it at dinner and so on, and seemed to like it. But in
a public lecture...so inconsistent. Well, as I say, here is your
only refuge and temple of honour. Here you can fall back on that
naked and awful arbitration which is the only thing that balances
the stars--a still, continuous violence. _Vae Victis!_  Down,
down, down with the defeated! Victory is the only ultimate fact. Carthage _was_ destroyed, the Red Indians are being exterminated:
that is the single certainty. In an hour from now that sun will
still be shining and that grass growing, and one of you will be
conquered; one of you will be the conqueror. When it has been
done, nothing will alter it. Heroes, I give you the hospitality
fit for heroes. And I salute the survivor. Fall on!" The two men took their swords. Then MacIan said steadily: "Mr.
Turnbull, lend me your sword a moment." Turnbull, with a questioning glance, handed him the weapon. MacIan took the second sword in his left hand and, with a violent
gesture, hurled it at the feet of little Mr. Wimpey. "Fight!" he said in a loud, harsh voice. "Fight me now!" Wimpey took a step backward, and bewildered words bubbled on his
lips. "Pick up that sword and fight me," repeated MacIan, with brows as
black as thunder. The little man turned to Turnbull with a gesture, demanding
judgement or protection. "Really, sir," he began, "this gentleman confuses..."

"You stinking little coward," roared Turnbull, suddenly releasing
his wrath. "Fight, if you're so fond of fighting! Fight, if
you're so fond of all that filthy philosophy! If winning is
everything, go in and win! If the weak must go to the wall, go to
the wall! Fight, you rat! Fight, or if you won't fight--run!" And he ran at Wimpey, with blazing eyes. Wimpey staggered back a few paces like a man struggling with his
own limbs. Then he felt the furious Scotchman coming at him like
an express train, doubling his size every second, with eyes as
big as windows and a sword as bright as the sun. Something broke
inside him, and he found himself running away, tumbling over his
own feet in terror, and crying out as he ran. "Chase him!" shouted Turnbull as MacIan snatched up the sword and
joined in the scamper. "Chase him over a county! Chase him into
the sea! Shoo! Shoo! Shoo!" The little man plunged like a rabbit among the tall flowers, the
two duellists after him. Turnbull kept at his tail with savage
ecstasy, still shooing him like a cat. But MacIan, as he ran past
the South Sea idol, paused an instant to spring upon its
pedestal. For five seconds he strained against the inert mass. Then it stirred; and he sent it over with a great crash among the
flowers, that engulfed it altogether. Then he went bounding after
the runaway. In the energy of his alarm the ex-Fellow of Magdalen managed to
leap the paling of his garden. The two pursuers went over it
after him like flying birds. He fled frantically down a long lane
with his two terrors on his trail till he came to a gap in the
hedge and went across a steep meadow like the wind. The two
Scotchmen, as they ran, kept up a cheery bellowing and waved
their swords. Up three slanting meadows, down four slanting
meadows on the other side, across another road, across a heath of
snapping bracken, through a wood, across another road, and to the
brink of a big pool, they pursued the flying philosopher. But
when he came to the pool his pace was so precipitate that he
could not stop it, and with a kind of lurching stagger, he fell
splash into the greasy water. Getting dripping to his feet, with
the water up to his knees, the worshipper of force and victory
waded disconsolately to the other side and drew himself on to the
bank. And Turnbull sat down on the grass and went off into
reverberations of laughter. A second afterwards the most
extraordinary grimaces were seen to distort the stiff face of
MacIan, and unholy sounds came from within. He had never
practised laughing, and it hurt him very much. VII. THE VILLAGE OF GRASSLEY-IN-THE-HOLE

At about half past one, under a strong blue sky, Turnbull got up
out of the grass and fern in which he had been lying, and his
still intermittent laughter ended in a kind of yawn. "I'm hungry," he said shortly. "Are you?" "I have not noticed," answered MacIan. "What are you going to
do?" "There's a village down the road, past the pool," answered
Turnbull. "I can see it from here. I can see the whitewashed
walls of some cottages and a kind of corner of the church. How
jolly it all looks. It looks so--I don't know what the word
is--so sensible. Don't fancy I'm under any illusions about
Arcadian virtue and the innocent villagers. Men make beasts of
themselves there with drink, but they don't deliberately make
devils of themselves with mere talking. They kill wild animals in
the wild woods, but they don't kill cats to the God of Victory. They don't----"  He broke off and suddenly spat on the ground. "Excuse me," he said; "it was ceremonial. One has to get the
taste out of one's mouth." "The taste of what?" asked MacIan. "I don't know the exact name for it," replied Turnbull. "Perhaps
it is the South Sea Islands, or it may be Magdalen College." There was a long pause, and MacIan also lifted his large limbs
off the ground--his eyes particularly dreamy. "I know what you mean, Turnbull," he said, "but...I always
thought you people agreed with all that." "With all that about doing as one likes, and the individual, and
Nature loving the strongest, and all the things which that
cockroach talked about." Turnbull's big blue-grey eyes stood open with a grave
astonishment. "Do you really mean to say, MacIan," he said, "that you fancied
that we, the Free-thinkers, that Bradlaugh, or Holyoake, or
Ingersoll, believe all that dirty, immoral mysticism about
Nature? Damn Nature!" "I supposed you did," said MacIan calmly.