He will be here in a moment,
I am sure." She had hardly spoken the words when Mr Elliot walked in. Captain Wentworth recollected him perfectly. There was no difference
between him and the man who had stood on the steps at Lyme,
admiring Anne as she passed, except in the air and look and manner
of the privileged relation and friend. He came in with eagerness,
appeared to see and think only of her, apologised for his stay,
was grieved to have kept her waiting, and anxious to get her away
without further loss of time and before the rain increased;
and in another moment they walked off together, her arm under his,
a gentle and embarrassed glance, and a "Good morning to you!" being all that she had time for, as she passed away. As soon as they were out of sight, the ladies of Captain Wentworth's party
began talking of them. "Mr Elliot does not dislike his cousin, I fancy?" "Oh! no, that is clear enough. One can guess what will happen there. He is always with them; half lives in the family, I believe. What a very good-looking man!" "Yes, and Miss Atkinson, who dined with him once at the Wallises,
says he is the most agreeable man she ever was in company with." "She is pretty, I think; Anne Elliot; very pretty, when one comes
to look at her. It is not the fashion to say so, but I confess
I admire her more than her sister." "Oh! so do I." "And so do I. No comparison. But the men are all wild after Miss Elliot. Anne is too delicate for them." Anne would have been particularly obliged to her cousin, if he would have
walked by her side all the way to Camden Place, without saying a word. She had never found it so difficult to listen to him, though nothing
could exceed his solicitude and care, and though his subjects
were principally such as were wont to be always interesting:
praise, warm, just, and discriminating, of Lady Russell,
and insinuations highly rational against Mrs Clay. But just now
she could think only of Captain Wentworth. She could not understand
his present feelings, whether he were really suffering much
from disappointment or not; and till that point were settled,
she could not be quite herself. She hoped to be wise and reasonable in time; but alas! alas! she must confess to herself that she was not wise yet. Another circumstance very essential for her to know, was how long
he meant to be in Bath; he had not mentioned it, or she could not
recollect it. He might be only passing through. But it was more probable
that he should be come to stay. In that case, so liable as every body was
to meet every body in Bath, Lady Russell would in all likelihood
see him somewhere. Would she recollect him? How would it all be? She had already been obliged to tell Lady Russell that Louisa Musgrove
was to marry Captain Benwick. It had cost her something to encounter
Lady Russell's surprise; and now, if she were by any chance
to be thrown into company with Captain Wentworth, her imperfect knowledge
of the matter might add another shade of prejudice against him. The following morning Anne was out with her friend, and for the first hour,
in an incessant and fearful sort of watch for him in vain; but at last,
in returning down Pulteney Street, she distinguished him
on the right hand pavement at such a distance as to have him in view
the greater part of the street. There were many other men about him,
many groups walking the same way, but there was no mistaking him. She looked instinctively at Lady Russell; but not from any mad idea
of her recognising him so soon as she did herself. No, it was
not to be supposed that Lady Russell would perceive him till they
were nearly opposite. She looked at her however, from time to time,
anxiously; and when the moment approached which must point him out,
though not daring to look again (for her own countenance she knew
was unfit to be seen), she was yet perfectly conscious of
Lady Russell's eyes being turned exactly in the direction for him--
of her being, in short, intently observing him. She could thoroughly
comprehend the sort of fascination he must possess over Lady Russell's mind,
the difficulty it must be for her to withdraw her eyes, the astonishment
she must be feeling that eight or nine years should have passed over him,
and in foreign climes and in active service too, without robbing him
of one personal grace! At last, Lady Russell drew back her head. "Now, how would she
speak of him?" "You will wonder," said she, "what has been fixing my eye so long;
but I was looking after some window-curtains, which Lady Alicia and
Mrs Frankland were telling me of last night. They described
the drawing-room window-curtains of one of the houses on this
side of the way, and this part of the street, as being the handsomest
and best hung of any in Bath, but could not recollect the exact number,
and I have been trying to find out which it could be; but I confess
I can see no curtains hereabouts that answer their description." Anne sighed and blushed and smiled, in pity and disdain,
either at her friend or herself. The part which provoked her most,
was that in all this waste of foresight and caution, she should have
lost the right moment for seeing whether he saw them. A day or two passed without producing anything. The theatre or the rooms,
where he was most likely to be, were not fashionable enough
for the Elliots, whose evening amusements were solely in the
elegant stupidity of private parties, in which they were getting
more and more engaged; and Anne, wearied of such a state of stagnation,
sick of knowing nothing, and fancying herself stronger because
her strength was not tried, was quite impatient for the concert evening. It was a concert for the benefit of a person patronised by Lady Dalrymple. Of course they must attend. It was really expected to be a good one,
and Captain Wentworth was very fond of music. If she could only have
a few minutes conversation with him again, she fancied she should
be satisfied; and as to the power of addressing him, she felt all over
courage if the opportunity occurred. Elizabeth had turned from him,
Lady Russell overlooked him; her nerves were strengthened
by these circumstances; she felt that she owed him attention. She had once partly promised Mrs Smith to spend the evening with her;
but in a short hurried call she excused herself and put it off,
with the more decided promise of a longer visit on the morrow. Mrs Smith gave a most good-humoured acquiescence. "By all means," said she; "only tell me all about it, when you do come. Who is your party?" Anne named them all. Mrs Smith made no reply; but when she was
leaving her said, and with an expression half serious, half arch,
"Well, I heartily wish your concert may answer; and do not fail me
to-morrow if you can come; for I begin to have a foreboding
that I may not have many more visits from you." Anne was startled and confused; but after standing in a moment's suspense,
was obliged, and not sorry to be obliged, to hurry away. Chapter 20


Sir Walter, his two daughters, and Mrs Clay, were the earliest
of all their party at the rooms in the evening; and as Lady Dalrymple
must be waited for, they took their station by one of the fires
in the Octagon Room. But hardly were they so settled, when the door
opened again, and Captain Wentworth walked in alone. Anne was
the nearest to him, and making yet a little advance, she instantly spoke. He was preparing only to bow and pass on, but her gentle "How do you do?" brought him out of the straight line to stand near her, and make enquiries
in return, in spite of the formidable father and sister in the back ground. Their being in the back ground was a support to Anne; she knew nothing
of their looks, and felt equal to everything which she believed
right to be done. While they were speaking, a whispering between her father and Elizabeth
caught her ear. She could not distinguish, but she must guess the subject;
and on Captain Wentworth's making a distant bow, she comprehended
that her father had judged so well as to give him that
simple acknowledgement of acquaintance, and she was just in time
by a side glance to see a slight curtsey from Elizabeth herself. This, though late, and reluctant, and ungracious, was yet
better than nothing, and her spirits improved. After talking, however, of the weather, and Bath, and the concert,
their conversation began to flag, and so little was said at last,
that she was expecting him to go every moment, but he did not;
he seemed in no hurry to leave her; and presently with renewed spirit,
with a little smile, a little glow, he said--

"I have hardly seen you since our day at Lyme. I am afraid you must have
suffered from the shock, and the more from its not overpowering you
at the time." She assured him that she had not. "It was a frightful hour," said he, "a frightful day!" and he
passed his hand across his eyes, as if the remembrance were still
too painful, but in a moment, half smiling again, added,
"The day has produced some effects however; has had some consequences
which must be considered as the very reverse of frightful. When you had the presence of mind to suggest that Benwick would be
the properest person to fetch a surgeon, you could have little idea
of his being eventually one of those most concerned in her recovery." "Certainly I could have none. But it appears--I should hope it would be
a very happy match. There are on both sides good principles
and good temper." "Yes," said he, looking not exactly forward; "but there, I think,
ends the resemblance. With all my soul I wish them happy, and rejoice
over every circumstance in favour of it. They have no difficulties
to contend with at home, no opposition, no caprice, no delays. The Musgroves are behaving like themselves, most honourably and kindly,
only anxious with true parental hearts to promote their daughter's comfort. All this is much, very much in favour of their happiness;
more than perhaps--"

He stopped. A sudden recollection seemed to occur, and to give him
some taste of that emotion which was reddening Anne's cheeks
and fixing her eyes on the ground. After clearing his throat, however,
he proceeded thus--

"I confess that I do think there is a disparity, too great a disparity,
and in a point no less essential than mind. I regard Louisa Musgrove
as a very amiable, sweet-tempered girl, and not deficient in understanding,
but Benwick is something more. He is a clever man, a reading man;
and I confess, that I do consider his attaching himself to her
with some surprise. Had it been the effect of gratitude,
had he learnt to love her, because he believed her to be preferring him,
it would have been another thing. But I have no reason to suppose it so. It seems, on the contrary, to have been a perfectly spontaneous,
untaught feeling on his side, and this surprises me. A man like him,
in his situation! with a heart pierced, wounded, almost broken! Fanny Harville was a very superior creature, and his attachment to her
was indeed attachment. A man does not recover from such
a devotion of the heart to such a woman. He ought not; he does not." Either from the consciousness, however, that his friend had recovered,
or from other consciousness, he went no farther; and Anne who,
in spite of the agitated voice in which the latter part had been uttered,
and in spite of all the various noises of the room, the almost ceaseless
slam of the door, and ceaseless buzz of persons walking through,
had distinguished every word, was struck, gratified, confused,
and beginning to breathe very quick, and feel an hundred things
in a moment. It was impossible for her to enter on such a subject;
and yet, after a pause, feeling the necessity of speaking,
and having not the smallest wish for a total change, she only deviated
so far as to say--

"You were a good while at Lyme, I think?"