1:21 And they went into Capernaum; and straightway on the sabbath day
he entered into the synagogue, and taught. 1:22 And they were astonished at his doctrine: for he taught them as
one that had authority, and not as the scribes. 1:23 And there was in their synagogue a man with an unclean spirit;
and he cried out, 1:24 Saying, Let us alone; what have we to do with
thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee
who thou art, the Holy One of God. 1:25 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of
him. 1:26 And when the unclean spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud
voice, he came out of him. 1:27 And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned among
themselves, saying, What thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for
with authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do
obey him. 1:28 And immediately his fame spread abroad throughout all the region
round about Galilee. 1:29 And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagogue, they
entered into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John. 1:30 But Simon's wife's mother lay sick of a fever, and anon they tell
him of her. 1:31 And he came and took her by the hand, and lifted her up; and
immediately the fever left her, and she ministered unto them. 1:32 And at even, when the sun did set, they brought unto him all that
were diseased, and them that were possessed with devils. 1:33 And all the city was gathered together at the door. 1:34 And he healed many that were sick of divers diseases, and cast
out many devils; and suffered not the devils to speak, because they
knew him. 1:35 And in the morning, rising up a great while before day, he went
out, and departed into a solitary place, and there prayed. 1:36 And Simon and they that were with him followed after him. 1:37 And when they had found him, they said unto him, All men seek for
thee. 1:38 And he said unto them, Let us go into the next towns, that I may
preach there also: for therefore came I forth. 1:39 And he preached in their synagogues throughout all Galilee, and
cast out devils. 1:40 And there came a leper to him, beseeching him, and kneeling down
to him, and saying unto him, If thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. 1:41 And Jesus, moved with compassion, put forth his hand, and touched
him, and saith unto him, I will; be thou clean. 1:42 And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosy departed
from him, and he was cleansed. 1:43 And he straitly charged him, and forthwith sent him away; 1:44
And saith unto him, See thou say nothing to any man: but go thy way,
shew thyself to the priest, and offer for thy cleansing those things
which Moses commanded, for a testimony unto them. 1:45 But he went out, and began to publish it much, and to blaze
abroad the matter, insomuch that Jesus could no more openly enter into
the city, but was without in desert places: and they came to him from
every quarter. 2:1 And again he entered into Capernaum after some days; and it was
noised that he was in the house. 2:2 And straightway many were gathered together, insomuch that there
was no room to receive them, no, not so much as about the door: and he
preached the word unto them. 2:3 And they come unto him, bringing one sick of the palsy, which was
borne of four. 2:4 And when they could not come nigh unto him for the press, they
uncovered the roof where he was: and when they had broken it up, they
let down the bed wherein the sick of the palsy lay. 2:5 When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsy,
Son, thy sins be forgiven thee. 2:6 But there was certain of the scribes sitting there, and reasoning
in their hearts, 2:7 Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies? who can
forgive sins but God only? 2:8 And immediately when Jesus perceived
in his spirit that they so reasoned within themselves, he said unto
them, Why reason ye these things in your hearts? 2:9 Whether is it
easier to say to the sick of the palsy, Thy sins be forgiven thee; or
to say, Arise, and take up thy bed, and walk? 2:10 But that ye may
know that the Son of man hath power on earth to forgive sins, (he
saith to the sick of the palsy,) 2:11 I say unto thee, Arise, and take
up thy bed, and go thy way into thine house. 2:12 And immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before
them all; insomuch that they were all amazed, and glorified God,
saying, We never saw it on this fashion. 2:13 And he went forth again by the sea side; and all the multitude
resorted unto him, and he taught them. 2:14 And as he passed by, he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at
the receipt of custom, and said unto him, Follow me. And he arose and
followed him. 2:15 And it came to pass, that, as Jesus sat at meat in his house,
many publicans and sinners sat also together with Jesus and his
disciples: for there were many, and they followed him. 2:16 And when the scribes and Pharisees saw him eat with publicans and
sinners, they said unto his disciples, How is it that he eateth and
drinketh with publicans and sinners? 2:17 When Jesus heard it, he
saith unto them, They that are whole have no need of the physician,
but they that are sick: I came not to call the righteous, but sinners
to repentance. 2:18 And the disciples of John and of the Pharisees used to fast: and
they come and say unto him, Why do the disciples of John and of the
Pharisees fast, but thy disciples fast not? 2:19 And Jesus said unto
them, Can the children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom
is with them? as long as they have the bridegroom with them, they
cannot fast. 2:20 But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days. 2:21 No man also seweth a piece of new cloth on an old garment: else
the new piece that filled it up taketh away from the old, and the rent
is made worse. 2:22 And no man putteth new wine into old bottles: else the new wine
doth burst the bottles, and the wine is spilled, and the bottles will
be marred: but new wine must be put into new bottles. 2:23 And it came to pass, that he went through the corn fields on the
sabbath day; and his disciples began, as they went, to pluck the ears
of corn. 2:24 And the Pharisees said unto him, Behold, why do they on the
sabbath day that which is not lawful? 2:25 And he said unto them,
Have ye never read what David did, when he had need, and was an
hungred, he, and they that were with him? 2:26 How he went into the
house of God in the days of Abiathar the high priest, and did eat the
shewbread, which is not lawful to eat but for the priests, and gave
also to them which were with him? 2:27 And he said unto them, The
sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath: 2:28 Therefore
the Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath. 3:1 And he entered again into the synagogue; and there was a man there
which had a withered hand. 3:2 And they watched him, whether he would heal him on the sabbath
day; that they might accuse him. 3:3 And he saith unto the man which had the withered hand, Stand
forth. 3:4 And he saith unto them, Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath
days, or to do evil? to save life, or to kill? But they held their
peace. 3:5 And when he had looked round about on them with anger, being
grieved for the hardness of their hearts, he saith unto the man,
Stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it out: and his hand was
restored whole as the other. 3:6 And the Pharisees went forth, and straightway took counsel with
the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him. 3:7 But Jesus withdrew himself with his disciples to the sea: and a
great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judaea, 3:8 And
from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and from beyond Jordan; and they
about Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, when they had heard what
great things he did, came unto him. 3:9 And he spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on
him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him. 3:10 For he had healed many; insomuch that they pressed upon him for
to touch him, as many as had plagues. 3:11 And unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and
cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God. 3:12 And he straitly charged them that they should not make him known. 3:13 And he goeth up into a mountain, and calleth unto him whom he
would: and they came unto him. 3:14 And he ordained twelve, that they should be with him, and that he
might send them forth to preach, 3:15 And to have power to heal
sicknesses, and to cast out devils: 3:16 And Simon he surnamed Peter;
3:17 And James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James; and
he surnamed them Boanerges, which is, The sons of thunder: 3:18 And
Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and
James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Canaanite,
3:19 And Judas Iscariot, which also betrayed him: and they went into
an house. 3:20 And the multitude cometh together again, so that they could not
so much as eat bread. 3:21 And when his friends heard of it, they went out to lay hold on
him: for they said, He is beside himself. 3:22 And the scribes which came down from Jerusalem said, He hath
Beelzebub, and by the prince of the devils casteth he out devils. 3:23 And he called them unto him, and said unto them in parables, How
can Satan cast out Satan? 3:24 And if a kingdom be divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand. 3:25 And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot
stand. 3:26 And if Satan rise up against himself, and be divided, he cannot
stand, but hath an end. 3:27 No man can enter into a strong man's house, and spoil his goods,
except he will first bind the strong man; and then he will spoil his
house. 3:28 Verily I say unto you, All sins shall be forgiven unto the sons
of men, and blasphemies wherewith soever they shall blaspheme: 3:29
But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost hath never
forgiveness, but is in danger of eternal damnation. 3:30 Because they said, He hath an unclean spirit. 3:31 There came then his brethren and his mother, and, standing
without, sent unto him, calling him. 3:32 And the multitude sat about him, and they said unto him, Behold,
thy mother and thy brethren without seek for thee. 3:33 And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother, or my brethren? 3:34 And he looked round about on them which sat about him, and said,
Behold my mother and my brethren! 3:35 For whosoever shall do the
will of God, the same is my brother, and my sister, and mother. 4:1 And he began again to teach by the sea side: and there was
gathered unto him a great multitude, so that he entered into a ship,
and sat in the sea; and the whole multitude was by the sea on the
land. 4:2 And he taught them many things by parables, and said unto them in
his doctrine, 4:3 Hearken; Behold, there went out a sower to sow: 4:4
And it came to pass, as he sowed, some fell by the way side, and the
fowls of the air came and devoured it up. 4:5 And some fell on stony ground, where it had not much earth; and
immediately it sprang up, because it had no depth of earth: 4:6 But
when the sun was up, it was scorched; and because it had no root, it
withered away. 4:7 And some fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it,
and it yielded no fruit. 4:8 And other fell on good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up
and increased; and brought forth, some thirty, and some sixty, and
some an hundred. 4:9 And he said unto them, He that hath ears to hear, let him hear. 4:10 And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve
asked of him the parable. 4:11 And he said unto them, Unto you it is given to know the mystery
of the kingdom of God: but unto them that are without, all these
things are done in parables: 4:12 That seeing they may see, and not
perceive; and hearing they may hear, and not understand; lest at any
time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven them. 4:13 And he said unto them, Know ye not this parable? and how then
will ye know all parables? 4:14 The sower soweth the word. 4:15 And these are they by the way side, where the word is sown; but
when they have heard, Satan cometh immediately, and taketh away the
word that was sown in their hearts. 4:16 And these are they likewise which are sown on stony ground; who,
when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness;
4:17 And have no root in themselves, and so endure but for a time:
afterward, when affliction or persecution ariseth for the word's sake,
immediately they are offended. 4:18 And these are they which are sown among thorns; such as hear the
word, 4:19 And the cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of
riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and
it becometh unfruitful.