Blacky doubted because he knew Farmer Brown's boy
so well that he couldn't imagine him afraid. Reddy doubted because he
didn't want to believe. You see, he was jealous of Buster Bear, and at
the same time he was afraid of him. So Reddy pretended not to believe a
word of what Little Joe Otter had said, and he agreed with Blacky that
only by seeing Farmer Brown's boy afraid could he ever be made to
believe it. But nearly everybody else believed it, and there was great
rejoicing. Most of them were afraid of Buster, very much afraid of him,
because he was so big and strong. But they were still more afraid of
Farmer Brown's boy, because they didn't know him or understand him, and
because in the past he had tried to catch some of them in traps and had
hunted some of them with his terrible gun. So now they were very proud to think that one of their own number
actually had frightened him, and they began to look on Buster Bear as a
real hero. They tried in ever so many ways to show him how friendly they
felt and went quite out of their way to do him favors. Whenever they met
one another, all they could talk about was the smartness and the
greatness of Buster Bear. "Now I guess Farmer Brown's boy will keep away from the Green Forest,
and we won't have to be all the time watching out for him," said Bobby
Coon, as he washed his dinner in the Laughing Brook, for you know he is
very neat and particular. "And he won't dare set any more traps for me," gloated Billy Mink. "Ah wish Brer Bear would go up to Farmer Brown's henhouse and scare
Farmer Brown's boy so that he would keep away from there. It would be a
favor to me which Ah cert'nly would appreciate," said Unc' Billy Possum
when he heard the news. "Let's all go together and tell Buster Bear how much obliged we are for
what he has done," proposed Jerry Muskrat. "That's a splendid idea!" cried Little Joe Otter. "We'll do it right
away." "Caw, caw caw!" broke in Blacky the Crow. "I say, let's wait and see for
ourselves if it is all true." "Of course it's true!" snapped Little Joe Otter. "Don't you believe I'm
telling the truth?" "Certainly, certainly. Of course no one doubts your word," replied
Blacky, with the utmost politeness. "But you say yourself that Farmer
Brown's boy didn't see Buster Bear, but only his footprint. Perhaps he
didn't know whose it was, and if he had he wouldn't have been afraid. Now I've got a plan by which we can see for ourselves if he really is
afraid of Buster Bear." "What is it?" asked Sammy Jay eagerly. Blacky the Crow shook his head and winked. "That's telling," said he. "I
want to think it over. If you meet me at the Big Hickory-tree at sun-up
to-morrow morning, and get everybody else to come that you can, perhaps
I will tell you." XI

BLACKY THE CROW TELLS HIS PLAN


  Blacky is a dreamer! Blacky is a schemer! His voice is strong;
    When things go wrong
  Blacky is a screamer! It's a fact. Blacky the Crow is forever dreaming and scheming and almost
always it is of mischief. He is one of the smartest and cleverest of all
the little people of the Green Meadows and the Green Forest, and all the
others know it. Blacky likes excitement. He wants something going on. The more exciting it is, the better he likes it. Then he has a chance to
use that harsh voice of his, and how he does use it! So now, as he sat in the top of the Big Hickory-tree beside the Smiling
Pool and looked down on all the little people gathered there, he was
very happy. In the first place he felt very important, and you know
Blacky dearly loves to feel important. They had all come at his
invitation to listen to a plan for seeing for themselves if it were
really true that Farmer Brown's boy was afraid of Buster Bear. On the Big Rock in the Smiling Pool sat Little Joe Otter, Billy Mink,
and Jerry Muskrat. On his big, green lily-pad sat Grandfather Frog. On
another lily-pad sat Spotty the Turtle. On the bank on one side of the
Smiling Pool were Peter Rabbit, Jumper the Hare, Danny Meadow Mouse,
Johnny Chuck, Jimmy Skunk, Unc' Billy Possum, Striped Chipmunk and Old
Mr. Toad. On the other side of the Smiling Pool were Reddy Fox, Digger
the Badger, and Bobby Coon. In the Big Hickory-tree were Chatterer the
Red Squirrel, Happy Jack the Gray Squirrel, and Sammy Jay. Blacky waited until he was sure that no one else was coming. Then he
cleared his throat very loudly and began to speak. "Friends," said he. Everybody grinned, for Blacky has played so many sharp tricks that no
one is really his friend unless it is that other mischief-maker, Sammy
Jay, who, you know, is Blacky's cousin. But no one said anything, and
Blacky went on. "Little Joe Otter has told us how he saw Farmer Brown's boy hurry home
when he found the footprint of Buster Bear on the edge of the Laughing
Brook, and how all the way he kept looking behind him, as if he were
afraid. Perhaps he was, and then again perhaps he wasn't. Perhaps he had
something else on his mind. You have made a hero of Buster Bear, because
you believe Little Joe's story. Now I don't say that I don't believe it,
but I do say that I will be a lot more sure that Farmer Brown's boy is
afraid of Buster when I see him run away myself. Now here is my plan:

"To-morrow morning, very early, Sammy Jay and I will make a great fuss
near the edge of the Green Forest. Farmer Brown's boy has a lot of
curiosity, and he will be sure to come over to see what it is all about. Then we will lead him to where Buster Bear is. If he runs away, I will
be the first to admit that Buster Bear is as great a hero as some of you
seem to think he is. It is a very simple plan, and if you will all hide
where you can watch, you will be able to see for yourselves if Little
Joe Otter is right. Now what do you say?" Right away everybody began to talk at the same time. It was such a
simple plan that everybody agreed to it. And it promised to be so
exciting that everybody promised to be there, that is, everybody but
Grandfather Frog and Spotty the Turtle, who didn't care to go so far
away from the Smiling Pool. So it was agreed that Blacky should try his
plan the very next morning. XII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY AND BUSTER BEAR GROW CURIOUS


Ever since it was light enough to see at all, Blacky the Crow had been
sitting in the top of the tallest tree on the edge of the Green Forest
nearest to Farmer Brown's house, and never for an instant had he taken
his eyes from Farmer Brown's back door. What was he watching for? Why,
for Farmer Brown's boy to come out on his way to milk the cows. Meanwhile, Sammy Jay was slipping silently through the Green Forest,
looking for Buster Bear, so that when the time came he could let his
cousin, Blacky the Crow, know just where Buster was. By and by the back door of Farmer Brown's house opened, and out stepped
Farmer Brown's boy. In each hand he carried a milk pail. Right away
Blacky began to scream at the top of his lungs. "Caw, caw, caw!" shouted
Blacky. "Caw, caw, caw!" And all the time he flew about among the trees
near the edge of the Green Forest as if so excited that he couldn't keep
still. Farmer Brown's boy looked over there as if he wondered what all
that fuss was about, as indeed he did, but he didn't start to go over
and see. No, Sir, he started straight for the barn. Blacky didn't know what to make of it. You see, smart as he is and
shrewd as he is, Blacky doesn't know anything about the meaning of duty,
for he never has to work excepting to get enough to eat. So, when Farmer
Brown's boy started for the barn instead of for the Green Forest,
Blacky didn't know what to make of it. He screamed harder and louder
than ever, until his voice grew so hoarse he couldn't scream any more,
but Farmer Brown's boy kept right on to the barn. "I'd like to know what you're making such a fuss about, Mr. Crow, but
I've got to feed the cows and milk them first," said he. Now all this time the other little people of the Green Forest and the
Green Meadows had been hiding where they could see all that went on. When Farmer Brown's boy disappeared in the barn, Chatterer the Red
Squirrel snickered right out loud. "Ha, ha, ha! This is a great plan of
yours, Blacky! Ha, ha, ha!" he shouted. Blacky couldn't find a word to
say. He just hung his head, which is something Blacky seldom does.