8:12 And he sighed deeply in his spirit, and saith, Why doth this
generation seek after a sign? verily I say unto you, There shall no
sign be given unto this generation. 8:13 And he left them, and entering into the ship again departed to
the other side. 8:14 Now the disciples had forgotten to take bread, neither had they
in the ship with them more than one loaf. 8:15 And he charged them, saying, Take heed, beware of the leaven of
the Pharisees, and of the leaven of Herod. 8:16 And they reasoned among themselves, saying, It is because we have
no bread. 8:17 And when Jesus knew it, he saith unto them, Why reason ye,
because ye have no bread? perceive ye not yet, neither understand? have ye your heart yet hardened? 8:18 Having eyes, see ye not? and
having ears, hear ye not? and do ye not remember? 8:19 When I brake
the five loaves among five thousand, how many baskets full of
fragments took ye up? They say unto him, Twelve. 8:20 And when the seven among four thousand, how many baskets full of
fragments took ye up? And they said, Seven. 8:21 And he said unto them, How is it that ye do not understand? 8:22
And he cometh to Bethsaida; and they bring a blind man unto him, and
besought him to touch him. 8:23 And he took the blind man by the hand, and led him out of the
town; and when he had spit on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, he
asked him if he saw ought. 8:24 And he looked up, and said, I see men as trees, walking. 8:25 After that he put his hands again upon his eyes, and made him
look up: and he was restored, and saw every man clearly. 8:26 And he sent him away to his house, saying, Neither go into the
town, nor tell it to any in the town. 8:27 And Jesus went out, and his disciples, into the towns of Caesarea
Philippi: and by the way he asked his disciples, saying unto them,
Whom do men say that I am? 8:28 And they answered, John the Baptist;
but some say, Elias; and others, One of the prophets. 8:29 And he saith unto them, But whom say ye that I am? And Peter
answereth and saith unto him, Thou art the Christ. 8:30 And he charged them that they should tell no man of him. 8:31 And he began to teach them, that the Son of man must suffer many
things, and be rejected of the elders, and of the chief priests, and
scribes, and be killed, and after three days rise again. 8:32 And he spake that saying openly. And Peter took him, and began to
rebuke him. 8:33 But when he had turned about and looked on his disciples, he
rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me, Satan: for thou savourest
not the things that be of God, but the things that be of men. 8:34 And when he had called the people unto him with his disciples
also, he said unto them, Whosoever will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross, and follow me. 8:35 For whosoever will save his life shall lose it; but whosoever
shall lose his life for my sake and the gospel's, the same shall save
it. 8:36 For what shall it profit a man, if he shall gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul? 8:37 Or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul? 8:38 Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my
words in this adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the
Son of man be ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with
the holy angels. 9:1 And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, That there be some
of them that stand here, which shall not taste of death, till they
have seen the kingdom of God come with power. 9:2 And after six days Jesus taketh with him Peter, and James, and
John, and leadeth them up into an high mountain apart by themselves:
and he was transfigured before them. 9:3 And his raiment became shining, exceeding white as snow; so as no
fuller on earth can white them. 9:4 And there appeared unto them Elias with Moses: and they were
talking with Jesus. 9:5 And Peter answered and said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to
be here: and let us make three tabernacles; one for thee, and one for
Moses, and one for Elias. 9:6 For he wist not what to say; for they were sore afraid. 9:7 And there was a cloud that overshadowed them: and a voice came out
of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son: hear him. 9:8 And suddenly, when they had looked round about, they saw no man
any more, save Jesus only with themselves. 9:9 And as they came down from the mountain, he charged them that they
should tell no man what things they had seen, till the Son of man were
risen from the dead. 9:10 And they kept that saying with themselves, questioning one with
another what the rising from the dead should mean. 9:11 And they asked him, saying, Why say the scribes that Elias must
first come? 9:12 And he answered and told them, Elias verily cometh
first, and restoreth all things; and how it is written of the Son of
man, that he must suffer many things, and be set at nought. 9:13 But I say unto you, That Elias is indeed come, and they have done
unto him whatsoever they listed, as it is written of him. 9:14 And when he came to his disciples, he saw a great multitude about
them, and the scribes questioning with them. 9:15 And straightway all the people, when they beheld him, were
greatly amazed, and running to him saluted him. 9:16 And he asked the scribes, What question ye with them? 9:17 And
one of the multitude answered and said, Master, I have brought unto
thee my son, which hath a dumb spirit; 9:18 And wheresoever he taketh
him, he teareth him: and he foameth, and gnasheth with his teeth, and
pineth away: and I spake to thy disciples that they should cast him
out; and they could not. 9:19 He answereth him, and saith, O faithless generation, how long
shall I be with you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him unto me. 9:20 And they brought him unto him: and when he saw him, straightway
the spirit tare him; and he fell on the ground, and wallowed foaming. 9:21 And he asked his father, How long is it ago since this came unto
him? And he said, Of a child. 9:22 And ofttimes it hath cast him into the fire, and into the waters,
to destroy him: but if thou canst do any thing, have compassion on us,
and help us. 9:23 Jesus said unto him, If thou canst believe, all things are
possible to him that believeth. 9:24 And straightway the father of the child cried out, and said with
tears, Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief. 9:25 When Jesus saw that the people came running together, he rebuked
the foul spirit, saying unto him, Thou dumb and deaf spirit, I charge
thee, come out of him, and enter no more into him. 9:26 And the spirit cried, and rent him sore, and came out of him: and
he was as one dead; insomuch that many said, He is dead. 9:27 But Jesus took him by the hand, and lifted him up; and he arose. 9:28 And when he was come into the house, his disciples asked him
privately, Why could not we cast him out? 9:29 And he said unto them,
This kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting. 9:30 And they departed thence, and passed through Galilee; and he
would not that any man should know it. 9:31 For he taught his disciples, and said unto them, The Son of man
is delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and after
that he is killed, he shall rise the third day. 9:32 But they understood not that saying, and were afraid to ask him. 9:33 And he came to Capernaum: and being in the house he asked them,
What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way? 9:34 But
they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among
themselves, who should be the greatest. 9:35 And he sat down, and called the twelve, and saith unto them, If
any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant
of all. 9:36 And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when
he had taken him in his arms, he said unto them, 9:37 Whosoever shall
receive one of such children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever
shall receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me. 9:38 And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out
devils in thy name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him,
because he followeth not us. 9:39 But Jesus said, Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall
do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. 9:40 For he that is not against us is on our part. 9:41 For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name,
because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose
his reward. 9:42 And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe
in me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and he were cast into the sea. 9:43 And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into
the fire that never shall be quenched: 9:44 Where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched. 9:45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell, into
the fire that never shall be quenched: 9:46 Where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched. 9:47 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee
to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to
be cast into hell fire: 9:48 Where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched. 9:49 For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice
shall be salted with salt. 9:50 Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith
will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with
another. 10:1 And he arose from thence, and cometh into the coasts of Judaea by
the farther side of Jordan: and the people resort unto him again; and,
as he was wont, he taught them again. 10:2 And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is it lawful for a
man to put away his wife? tempting him. 10:3 And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command you? 10:4 And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and
to put her away. 10:5 And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your
heart he wrote you this precept. 10:6 But from the beginning of the creation God made them male and
female. 10:7 For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and
cleave to his wife; 10:8 And they twain shall be one flesh: so then
they are no more twain, but one flesh. 10:9 What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. 10:10 And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same
matter. 10:11 And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and
marry another, committeth adultery against her. 10:12 And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to
another, she committeth adultery. 10:13 And they brought young children to him, that he should touch
them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. 10:14 But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto
them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not:
for of such is the kingdom of God. 10:15 Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom
of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein.