7:4 They are all adulterers, as an oven heated by the baker, who
ceaseth from raising after he hath kneaded the dough, until it be
leavened. 7:5 In the day of our king the princes have made him sick with bottles
of wine; he stretched out his hand with scorners. 7:6 For they have made ready their heart like an oven, whiles they lie
in wait: their baker sleepeth all the night; in the morning it burneth
as a flaming fire. 7:7 They are all hot as an oven, and have devoured their judges; all
their kings are fallen: there is none among them that calleth unto me. 7:8 Ephraim, he hath mixed himself among the people; Ephraim is a cake
not turned. 7:9 Strangers have devoured his strength, and he knoweth it not: yea,
gray hairs are here and there upon him, yet he knoweth not. 7:10 And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face: and they do not
return to the LORD their God, nor seek him for all this. 7:11 Ephraim also is like a silly dove without heart: they call to
Egypt, they go to Assyria. 7:12 When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them; I will bring
them down as the fowls of the heaven; I will chastise them, as their
congregation hath heard. 7:13 Woe unto them! for they have fled from me: destruction unto them! because they have transgressed against me: though I have redeemed
them, yet they have spoken lies against me. 7:14 And they have not cried unto me with their heart, when they
howled upon their beds: they assemble themselves for corn and wine,
and they rebel against me. 7:15 Though I have bound and strengthened their arms, yet do they
imagine mischief against me. 7:16 They return, but not to the most High: they are like a deceitful
bow: their princes shall fall by the sword for the rage of their
tongue: this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt. 8:1 Set the trumpet to thy mouth. He shall come as an eagle against
the house of the LORD, because they have transgressed my covenant, and
trespassed against my law. 8:2 Israel shall cry unto me, My God, we know thee. 8:3 Israel hath cast off the thing that is good: the enemy shall
pursue him. 8:4 They have set up kings, but not by me: they have made princes, and
I knew it not: of their silver and their gold have they made them
idols, that they may be cut off. 8:5 Thy calf, O Samaria, hath cast thee off; mine anger is kindled
against them: how long will it be ere they attain to innocency? 8:6
For from Israel was it also: the workman made it; therefore it is not
God: but the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces. 8:7 For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind: it
hath no stalk; the bud shall yield no meal: if so be it yield, the
strangers shall swallow it up. 8:8 Israel is swallowed up: now shall they be among the Gentiles as a
vessel wherein is no pleasure. 8:9 For they are gone up to Assyria, a wild ass alone by himself:
Ephraim hath hired lovers. 8:10 Yea, though they have hired among the nations, now will I gather
them, and they shall sorrow a little for the burden of the king of
princes. 8:11 Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sin, altars shall be
unto him to sin. 8:12 I have written to him the great things of my law, but they were
counted as a strange thing. 8:13 They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offerings, and
eat it; but the LORD accepteth them not; now will he remember their
iniquity, and visit their sins: they shall return to Egypt. 8:14 For Israel hath forgotten his Maker, and buildeth temples; and
Judah hath multiplied fenced cities: but I will send a fire upon his
cities, and it shall devour the palaces thereof. 9:1 Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people: for thou hast
gone a whoring from thy God, thou hast loved a reward upon every
cornfloor. 9:2 The floor and the winepress shall not feed them, and the new wine
shall fail in her. 9:3 They shall not dwell in the LORD's land; but Ephraim shall return
to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean things in Assyria. 9:4 They shall not offer wine offerings to the LORD, neither shall
they be pleasing unto him: their sacrifices shall be unto them as the
bread of mourners; all that eat thereof shall be polluted: for their
bread for their soul shall not come into the house of the LORD. 9:5 What will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of
the LORD? 9:6 For, lo, they are gone because of destruction: Egypt
shall gather them up, Memphis shall bury them: the pleasant places for
their silver, nettles shall possess them: thorns shall be in their
tabernacles. 9:7 The days of visitation are come, the days of recompence are come;
Israel shall know it: the prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad,
for the multitude of thine iniquity, and the great hatred. 9:8 The watchman of Ephraim was with my God: but the prophet is a
snare of a fowler in all his ways, and hatred in the house of his God. 9:9 They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah:
therefore he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins. 9:10 I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness; I saw your fathers
as the firstripe in the fig tree at her first time: but they went to
Baalpeor, and separated themselves unto that shame; and their
abominations were according as they loved. 9:11 As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away like a bird, from the
birth, and from the womb, and from the conception. 9:12 Though they bring up their children, yet will I bereave them,
that there shall not be a man left: yea, woe also to them when I
depart from them! 9:13 Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a
pleasant place: but Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the
murderer. 9:14 Give them, O LORD: what wilt thou give? give them a miscarrying
womb and dry breasts. 9:15 All their wickedness is in Gilgal: for there I hated them: for
the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of mine house, I
will love them no more: all their princes are revolters. 9:16 Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried up, they shall bear no
fruit: yea, though they bring forth, yet will I slay even the beloved
fruit of their womb. 9:17 My God will cast them away, because they did not hearken unto
him: and they shall be wanderers among the nations. 10:1 Israel is an empty vine, he bringeth forth fruit unto himself:
according to the multitude of his fruit he hath increased the altars;
according to the goodness of his land they have made goodly images. 10:2 Their heart is divided; now shall they be found faulty: he shall
break down their altars, he shall spoil their images. 10:3 For now they shall say, We have no king, because we feared not
the LORD; what then should a king do to us? 10:4 They have spoken
words, swearing falsely in making a covenant: thus judgment springeth
up as hemlock in the furrows of the field. 10:5 The inhabitants of Samaria shall fear because of the calves of
Bethaven: for the people thereof shall mourn over it, and the priests
thereof that rejoiced on it, for the glory thereof, because it is
departed from it. 10:6 It shall be also carried unto Assyria for a present to king
Jareb: Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his
own counsel. 10:7 As for Samaria, her king is cut off as the foam upon the water. 10:8 The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be
destroyed: the thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars;
and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us; and to the hills, Fall
on us. 10:9 O Israel, thou hast sinned from the days of Gibeah: there they
stood: the battle in Gibeah against the children of iniquity did not
overtake them. 10:10 It is in my desire that I should chastise them; and the people
shall be gathered against them, when they shall bind themselves in
their two furrows. 10:11 And Ephraim is as an heifer that is taught, and loveth to tread
out the corn; but I passed over upon her fair neck: I will make
Ephraim to ride; Judah shall plow, and Jacob shall break his clods. 10:12 Sow to yourselves in righteousness, reap in mercy; break up your
fallow ground: for it is time to seek the LORD, till he come and rain
righteousness upon you. 10:13 Ye have plowed wickedness, ye have reaped iniquity; ye have
eaten the fruit of lies: because thou didst trust in thy way, in the
multitude of thy mighty men. 10:14 Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy
fortresses shall be spoiled, as Shalman spoiled Betharbel in the day
of battle: the mother was dashed in pieces upon her children. 10:15 So shall Bethel do unto you because of your great wickedness: in
a morning shall the king of Israel utterly be cut off. 11:1 When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out
of Egypt. 11:2 As they called them, so they went from them: they sacrificed unto
Baalim, and burned incense to graven images. 11:3 I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms; but they
knew not that I healed them. 11:4 I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I was to
them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat
unto them. 11:5 He shall not return into the land of Egypt, and the Assyrian
shall be his king, because they refused to return. 11:6 And the sword shall abide on his cities, and shall consume his
branches, and devour them, because of their own counsels. 11:7 And my people are bent to backsliding from me: though they called
them to the most High, none at all would exalt him. 11:8 How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee,
Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as
Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled
together. 11:9 I will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not
return to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man; the Holy One in
the midst of thee: and I will not enter into the city. 11:10 They shall walk after the LORD: he shall roar like a lion: when
he shall roar, then the children shall tremble from the west. 11:11 They shall tremble as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of
the land of Assyria: and I will place them in their houses, saith the
LORD. 11:12 Ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of Israel
with deceit: but Judah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful with the
saints. 12:1 Ephraim feedeth on wind, and followeth after the east wind: he
daily increaseth lies and desolation; and they do make a covenant with
the Assyrians, and oil is carried into Egypt. 12:2 The LORD hath also a controversy with Judah, and will punish
Jacob according to his ways; according to his doings will he
recompense him. 12:3 He took his brother by the heel in the womb, and by his strength
he had power with God: 12:4 Yea, he had power over the angel, and
prevailed: he wept, and made supplication unto him: he found him in
Bethel, and there he spake with us; 12:5 Even the LORD God of hosts;
the LORD is his memorial. 12:6 Therefore turn thou to thy God: keep mercy and judgment and wait
on thy God continually. 12:7 He is a merchant, the balances of deceit are in his hand: he
loveth to oppress. 12:8 And Ephraim said, Yet I am become rich, I have found me out
substance: in all my labours they shall find none iniquity in me that
were sin. 12:9 And I that am the LORD thy God from the land of Egypt will yet
make thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the days of the solemn feast. 12:10 I have also spoken by the prophets, and I have multiplied
visions, and used similitudes, by the ministry of the prophets. 12:11 Is there iniquity in Gilead? surely they are vanity: they
sacrifice bullocks in Gilgal; yea, their altars are as heaps in the
furrows of the fields. 12:12 And Jacob fled into the country of Syria, and Israel served for
a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep. 12:13 And by a prophet the LORD brought Israel out of Egypt, and by a
prophet was he preserved. 12:14 Ephraim provoked him to anger most bitterly: therefore shall he
leave his blood upon him, and his reproach shall his LORD return unto
him. 13:1 When Ephraim spake trembling, he exalted himself in Israel; but
when he offended in Baal, he died. 13:2 And now they sin more and more, and have made them molten images
of their silver, and idols according to their own understanding, all
of it the work of the craftsmen: they say of them, Let the men that
sacrifice kiss the calves. 13:3 Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud and as the early dew
that passeth away, as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out
of the floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney. 13:4 Yet I am the LORD thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt
know no god but me: for there is no saviour beside me. 13:5 I did know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought. 13:6 According to their pasture, so were they filled; they were
filled, and their heart was exalted; therefore have they forgotten me. 13:7 Therefore I will be unto them as a lion: as a leopard by the way
will I observe them: 13:8 I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved
of her whelps, and will rend the caul of their heart, and there will I
devour them like a lion: the wild beast shall tear them. 13:9 O Israel, thou hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thine help.