9:1 Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power
and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases. 9:2 And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the
sick. 9:3 And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither
staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two
coats apiece. 9:4 And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence
depart. 9:5 And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city,
shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them. 9:6 And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the
gospel, and healing every where. 9:7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him: and he
was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was risen
from the dead; 9:8 And of some, that Elias had appeared; and of
others, that one of the old prophets was risen again. 9:9 And Herod said, John have I beheaded: but who is this, of whom I
hear such things? And he desired to see him. 9:10 And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they
had done. And he took them, and went aside privately into a desert
place belonging to the city called Bethsaida. 9:11 And the people, when they knew it, followed him: and he received
them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that
had need of healing. 9:12 And when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and
said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the
towns and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals: for we are
here in a desert place. 9:13 But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We
have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we should go and
buy meat for all this people. 9:14 For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his
disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company. 9:15 And they did so, and made them all sit down. 9:16 Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up
to heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to
set before the multitude. 9:17 And they did eat, and were all filled: and there was taken up of
fragments that remained to them twelve baskets. 9:18 And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were
with him: and he asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am? 9:19 They answering said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and
others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again. 9:20 He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter answering
said, The Christ of God. 9:21 And he straitly charged them, and commanded them to tell no man
that thing; 9:22 Saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and
be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain,
and be raised the third day. 9:23 And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. 9:24 For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever
will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it. 9:25 For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and
lose himself, or be cast away? 9:26 For whosoever shall be ashamed of
me and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's, and of the holy
angels. 9:27 But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which
shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God. 9:28 And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he
took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray. 9:29 And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and
his raiment was white and glistering. 9:30 And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and
Elias: 9:31 Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he
should accomplish at Jerusalem. 9:32 But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and
when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood
with him. 9:33 And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said unto
Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias: not
knowing what he said. 9:34 While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them:
and they feared as they entered into the cloud. 9:35 And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my
beloved Son: hear him. 9:36 And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept
it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they
had seen. 9:37 And it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come
down from the hill, much people met him. 9:38 And, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, I
beseech thee, look upon my son: for he is mine only child. 9:39 And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and it
teareth him that he foameth again, and bruising him hardly departeth
from him. 9:40 And I besought thy disciples to cast him out; and they could not. 9:41 And Jesus answering said, O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you, and suffer you? Bring thy son hither. 9:42 And as he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare
him. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and
delivered him again to his father. 9:43 And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God. But while
they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did, he said unto
his disciples, 9:44 Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for
the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men. 9:45 But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them,
that they perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying. 9:46 Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be
greatest. 9:47 And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child,
and set him by him, 9:48 And said unto them, Whosoever shall receive
this child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me
receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least among you all, the
same shall be great. 9:49 And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils
in thy name; and we forbad him, because he followeth not with us. 9:50 And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not: for he that is not
against us is for us. 9:51 And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be
received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, 9:52 And
sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a
village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. 9:53 And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he
would go to Jerusalem. 9:54 And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord,
wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as Elias did? 9:55 But he turned, and rebuked them, and
said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. 9:56 For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to
save them. And they went to another village. 9:57 And it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain man
said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. 9:58 And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air
have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 9:59 And he said unto another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, suffer me
first to go and bury my father. 9:60 Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou
and preach the kingdom of God. 9:61 And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first
go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house. 9:62 And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the
plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God. 10:1 After these things the LORD appointed other seventy also, and
sent them two and two before his face into every city and place,
whither he himself would come. 10:2 Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the
labourers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he
would send forth labourers into his harvest. 10:3 Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. 10:4 Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by
the way. 10:5 And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
house. 10:6 And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it:
if not, it shall turn to you again. 10:7 And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as
they give: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house
to house. 10:8 And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such
things as are set before you: 10:9 And heal the sick that are therein,
and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 10:10 But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go
your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, 10:11 Even the
very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against
you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you. 10:12 But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day
for Sodom, than for that city. 10:13 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the
mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in
you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and
ashes. 10:14 But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the
judgment, than for you. 10:15 And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be
thrust down to hell. 10:16 He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you
despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me. 10:17 And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the
devils are subject unto us through thy name. 10:18 And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven. 10:19 Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by
any means hurt you. 10:20 Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are
subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written
in heaven. 10:21 In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so,
Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight. 10:22 All things are delivered to me of my Father: and no man knoweth
who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son,
and he to whom the Son will reveal him. 10:23 And he turned him unto his disciples, and said privately,
Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see: 10:24 For I
tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them. 10:25 And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying,
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? 10:26 He said unto
him, What is written in the law? how readest thou? 10:27 And he
answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind; and thy neighbour as thyself. 10:28 And he said unto him, Thou hast answered right: this do, and
thou shalt live. 10:29 But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is
my neighbour? 10:30 And Jesus answering said, A certain man went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him
of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. 10:31 And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and
when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. 10:32 And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked
on him, and passed by on the other side.