All the way home through the Green Forest, Farmer Brown's boy kept
looking behind him, and he didn't draw a long breath until he reached
the edge of the Green Forest. He hadn't run, but he had wanted to. "Huh!" said Buster Bear to Little Joe Otter, "I believe he was afraid!" And Buster Bear was just exactly right. IX

LITTLE JOE OTTER HAS GREAT NEWS TO TELL


Little Joe Otter was fairly bursting with excitement. He could hardly
contain himself. He felt that he had the greatest news to tell since
Peter Rabbit had first found the tracks of Buster Bear in the Green
Forest. He couldn't keep it to himself a minute longer than he had to. So he hurried to the Smiling Pool, where he was sure he would find Billy
Mink and Jerry Muskrat and Grandfather Frog and Spotty the Turtle, and
he hoped that perhaps some of the little people who live in the Green
Forest might be there too. Sure enough, Peter Rabbit was there on one
side of the Smiling Pool, making faces at Reddy Fox, who was on the
other side, which, of course, was not at all nice of Peter. Mr. and Mrs.
Redwing were there, and Blacky the Crow was sitting in the Big
Hickory-tree. Little Joe Otter swam straight to the Big Rock and climbed up to the
very highest part. He looked so excited, and his eyes sparkled so, that
every one knew right away that something had happened. "Hi!" cried Billy Mink. "Look at Little Joe Otter! It must be that for
once he has been smarter than Buster Bear." Little Joe made a good-natured face at Billy Mink and shook his head. "No, Billy," said he, "you are wrong, altogether wrong. I don't believe
anybody can be smarter than Buster Bear." [Illustration: Reddy glared across the Smiling Pool at Peter. _Page 45._]

Reddy Fox rolled his lips back in an unpleasant grin. "Don't be too
sure of that!" he snapped. "I'm not through with him yet." "Boaster! Boaster!" cried Peter Rabbit. Reddy glared across the Smiling Pool at Peter. "I'm not through with you
either, Peter Rabbit!" he snarled. "You'll find it out one of these fine
days!" "Reddy, Reddy, smart and sly,
  Couldn't catch a buzzing fly!" taunted Peter. "Chug-a-rum!" said Grandfather Frog in his deepest, gruffest voice. "We
know all about that. What we want to know is what Little Joe Otter has
got on his mind." "It's news--great news!" cried Little Joe. "We can tell better how great it is when we hear what it is," replied
Grandfather Frog testily. "What is it?" Little Joe Otter looked around at all the eager faces watching him, and
then in the slowest, most provoking way, he drawled: "Farmer Brown's boy
is afraid of Buster Bear." For a minute no one said a word. Then Blacky the Crow leaned down from
his perch in the Big Hickory-tree and looked very hard at Little Joe as
he said:

"I don't believe it. I don't believe a word of it. Farmer Brown's boy
isn't afraid of any one who lives in the Green Forest or on the Green
Meadows or in the Smiling Pool, and you know it. We are all afraid of
him." Little Joe glared back at Blacky. "I don't care whether you believe it
or not; it's true," he retorted. Then he told how early that very
morning he and Buster Bear had been fishing together in the Laughing
Brook, and how Farmer Brown's boy had been fishing there too, and hadn't
caught a single trout because they had all been caught or frightened
before he got there. Then he told how Farmer Brown's boy had found a
footprint of Buster Bear in the soft mud, and how he had stopped fishing
right away and started for home, looking behind him with fear in his
eyes all the way. "Now tell me that he isn't afraid!" concluded Little Joe. "For once he
knows just how we feel when he comes prowling around where we are. Isn't
that great news? Now we'll get even with _him_!" "I'll believe it when I see it for myself!" snapped Blacky the Crow. X

BUSTER BEAR BECOMES A HERO


The news that Little Joe Otter told at the Smiling Pool,--how Farmer
Brown's boy had run away from Buster Bear without even seeing him,--soon
spread all over the Green Meadows and through the Green Forest, until
every one who lives there knew about it. Of course, Peter Rabbit helped
spread it. Trust Peter for that! But everybody else helped too. You see,
they had all been afraid of Farmer Brown's boy for so long that they
were tickled almost to pieces at the very thought of having some one in
the Green Forest who could make Farmer Brown's boy feel fear as they
had felt it. And so it was that Buster Bear became a hero right away to
most of them. A few doubted Little Joe's story. One of them was Blacky the Crow. Another was Reddy Fox. Blacky doubted because he knew Farmer Brown's boy
so well that he couldn't imagine him afraid. Reddy doubted because he
didn't want to believe. You see, he was jealous of Buster Bear, and at
the same time he was afraid of him. So Reddy pretended not to believe a
word of what Little Joe Otter had said, and he agreed with Blacky that
only by seeing Farmer Brown's boy afraid could he ever be made to
believe it. But nearly everybody else believed it, and there was great
rejoicing. Most of them were afraid of Buster, very much afraid of him,
because he was so big and strong. But they were still more afraid of
Farmer Brown's boy, because they didn't know him or understand him, and
because in the past he had tried to catch some of them in traps and had
hunted some of them with his terrible gun. So now they were very proud to think that one of their own number
actually had frightened him, and they began to look on Buster Bear as a
real hero. They tried in ever so many ways to show him how friendly they
felt and went quite out of their way to do him favors. Whenever they met
one another, all they could talk about was the smartness and the
greatness of Buster Bear. "Now I guess Farmer Brown's boy will keep away from the Green Forest,
and we won't have to be all the time watching out for him," said Bobby
Coon, as he washed his dinner in the Laughing Brook, for you know he is
very neat and particular. "And he won't dare set any more traps for me," gloated Billy Mink. "Ah wish Brer Bear would go up to Farmer Brown's henhouse and scare
Farmer Brown's boy so that he would keep away from there. It would be a
favor to me which Ah cert'nly would appreciate," said Unc' Billy Possum
when he heard the news. "Let's all go together and tell Buster Bear how much obliged we are for
what he has done," proposed Jerry Muskrat. "That's a splendid idea!" cried Little Joe Otter. "We'll do it right
away." "Caw, caw caw!" broke in Blacky the Crow. "I say, let's wait and see for
ourselves if it is all true." "Of course it's true!" snapped Little Joe Otter. "Don't you believe I'm
telling the truth?" "Certainly, certainly. Of course no one doubts your word," replied
Blacky, with the utmost politeness. "But you say yourself that Farmer
Brown's boy didn't see Buster Bear, but only his footprint. Perhaps he
didn't know whose it was, and if he had he wouldn't have been afraid. Now I've got a plan by which we can see for ourselves if he really is
afraid of Buster Bear." "What is it?" asked Sammy Jay eagerly.