"Do you know, uncle--do you know, Ben," said he--"there's to be the most
FAMOUS doings that ever were heard of upon the Downs here, the first day
of next month, which will be in a fortnight, thank my stars! I wish the
fortnight was over; I shall think of nothing else, I know, till that
happy day comes!" Mr. Gresham inquired why the first of September was to be so much happier
than any other day in the year. "Why," replied Hal, "Lady Diana Sweepstakes, you know, is a famous rider,
and archer, and ALL THAT--"

"Very likely," said Mr. Gresham, soberly; "but what then?" "Dear uncle!" cried Hal, "but you shall hear. There's to be a race upon
the Downs on the first of September, and after the race, there's to be an
archery meeting for the ladies, and Lady Diana Sweepstakes is to be one
of THEM. And after the ladies have done shooting--now, Ben, comes the
best part of it! we boys are to have our turn, and Lady Di is to give a
prize to the best marksman amongst us, of a very handsome bow and arrow! Do you know, I've been practising already, and I'll show you, to-morrow,
as soon as it comes home, the FAMOUS bow and arrow that Lady Diana has
given me; but, perhaps," added he, with a scornful laugh, "you like a
cat's cradle better than a bow and arrow." Ben made no reply to this taunt at the moment; but the next day, when
Hal's new bow and arrow came home, he convinced him that he knew how to
use it very well. "Ben," said his uncle, "you seem to be a good marksman, though you have
not boasted of yourself. I'll give you a bow and arrow, and, perhaps, if
you practise, you may make yourself an archer before the first of
September; and, in the meantime, you will not wish the fortnight to be
over, for you will have something to do." "Oh, sir," interrupted Hal, "but if you mean that Ben should put in for
the prize, he must have a uniform." "Why MUST he?" said Mr. Gresham. "Why, sir, because everybody has--I mean everybody that's anybody; and
Lady Diana was talking about the uniform all dinner time, and it's
settled, all about it, except the buttons:  the young Sweepstakes are to
get theirs made first for patterns--they are to be white, faced with
green, and they'll look very handsome, I'm sure; and I shall write to
mamma to-night, as Lady Diana bid me, about mine; and I shall tell her to
be sure to answer my letter, without fail, by return of post; and then,
if mamma makes no objection, which I know she won't, because she never
thinks much about expense, and ALL THAT--then I shall bespeak my uniform,
and get it made by the same tailor that makes for Lady Diana and the
young Sweepstakes." "Mercy upon us!" said Mr. Gresham, who was almost stunned by the rapid
vociferation with which this long speech about a uniform was pronounced. "I don't pretend to understand these things," added he, with an air of
simplicity; "but we will inquire, Ben, into the necessity of the case;
and if it is necessary--or, if you think it necessary, that you shall
have a uniform--why, I'll give you one." "YOU, uncle? Will you, INDEED?" exclaimed Hal, with amazement painted in
his countenance. "Well, that's the last thing in the world I should have
expected! You are not at all the sort of person I should have thought
would care about a uniform; and now I should have supposed you'd have
thought it extravagant to have a coat on purpose only for one day; and
I'm sure Lady Diana Sweepstakes thought as I do; for when I told her of
that motto over your kitchen chimney, 'WASTE NOT, WANT NOT,' she laughed,
and said that I had better not talk to you about uniforms, and that my
mother was the proper person to write to about my uniform:  but I'll tell
Lady Diana, uncle, how good you are, and how much she was mistaken." "Take care how you do that," said Mr. Gresham:  "for perhaps the lady was
not mistaken." "Nay, did not you say, just now, you would give poor Ben a uniform?" "I said I would, if he thought it necessary to have one." "Oh, I'll answer for it, he'll think it necessary, " said Hal, laughing,
"because it is necessary." "Allow him, at least, to judge for himself," said Mr. Gresham. "My dear uncle, but I assure you," said Hal, earnestly, "there's no
judging about the matter, because really, upon my word, Lady Diana said
distinctly, that her sons were to have uniforms, white faced with green,
and a green and white cockade in their hats." "May be so," said Mr. Gresham, still with the same look of calm
simplicity; "put on your hats, boys, and come with me. I know a
gentleman whose sons are to be at this archery meeting, and we will
inquire into all the particulars from him. Then, after we have seen him
(it is not eleven o'clock yet) we shall have time enough to walk on to
Bristol, and choose the cloth for Ben's uniform, if it is necessary." "I cannot tell what to make of all he says," whispered Hal, as he reached
down his hat; "do you think, Ben, he means to give you this uniform, or
not?" "I think," said Ben, "that he means to give me one, if it is necessary;
or, as he said, if I think it is necessary." "And that to be sure you will; won't you? or else you'll be a great fool,
I know, after all I've told you. How can anyone in the world know so
much about the matter as I, who have dined with Lady Diana Sweepstakes
but yesterday, and heard all about it from beginning to end? And as for
this gentleman that we are going to, I'm sure, if he knows anything about
the matter, he'll say exactly the same as I do." "We shall hear," said Ben, with a degree of composure which Hal could by
no means comprehend when a uniform was in question. The gentleman upon whom Mr. Gresham called had three sons, who were all
to be at this archery meeting; and they unanimously assured him, in the
presence of Hal and Ben, that they had never thought of buying uniforms
for this grand occasion, and that, amongst the number of their
acquaintance, they knew of but three boys whose friends intended to be at
such an UNNECESSARY expense. Hal stood amazed. "Such are the varieties of opinion upon all the grand affairs of life,"
said Mr. Gresham, looking at his nephews. "What amongst one set of
people you hear asserted to be absolutely necessary, you will hear from
another set of people is quite unnecessary. All that can be done, my
dear boys, in these difficult cases, is to judge for yourselves, which
opinions, and which people, are the most reasonable." Hal, who had been more accustomed to think of what was fashionable, than
of what was reasonable, without at all considering the good sense of what
his uncle said to him, replied, with childish petulance, "Indeed, sir, I
don't know what other people think; but I only know what Lady Diana
Sweepstakes said." The name of Lady Diana Sweepstakes, Hal thought, must
impress all present with respect; he was highly astonished, when, as he
looked round, he saw a smile of contempt upon everyone's countenance:
and he was yet further bewildered, when he heard her spoken of as a very
silly, extravagant, ridiculous woman, whose opinion no prudent person
would ask upon any subject, and whose example was to be shunned, instead
of being imitated. "Ay, my dear Hal," said his uncle, smiling at his look of amazement,
"these are some of the things that young people must learn from
experience. All the world do not agree in opinion about characters:  you
will hear the same person admired in one company, and blamed in another;
so that we must still come round to the same point, 'Judge for
yourself.'" Hal's thoughts were, however, at present too full of the uniform to allow
his judgment to act with perfect impartiality. As soon as their visit
was over, and all the time they walked down the hill from Prince's
Building's towards Bristol, he continued to repeat nearly the same
arguments, which he had formerly used, respecting necessity, the uniform,
and Lady Diana Sweepstakes. To all this Mr. Gresham made no reply, and
longer had the young gentleman expatiated upon the subject, which had so
strongly seized upon his imagination, had not his senses been forcibly
assailed at this instant by the delicious odours and tempting sight of
certain cakes and jellies in a pastrycook's shop. "Oh, uncle," said he,
as his uncle was going to turn the corner to pursue the road to Bristol,
"look at those jellies!" pointing to a confectioner's shop. "I must buy
some of those good things, for I have got some halfpence in my pocket." "Your having halfpence in your pocket is an excellent reason for eating,"
said Mr. Gresham, smiling. "But I really am hungry," said Hal; "you know, uncle, it is a good while
since breakfast." His uncle, who was desirous to see his nephews act without restraint,
that he might judge their characters, bid them do as they pleased. "Come, then, Ben, if you've any halfpence in your pocket." "I'm not hungry," said Ben. "I suppose THAT means that you've no halfpence," said Hal, laughing, with
the look of superiority which he had been taught to think the RICH might
assume towards those who were convicted either of poverty or economy. "Waste not, want not," said Ben to himself. Contrary to his cousin's
surmise, he happened to have two pennyworth of halfpence actually in his
pocket. At the very moment Hal stepped into the pastrycook's shop, a poor,
industrious man, with a wooden leg, who usually sweeps the dirty corner
of the walk which turns at this spot to the Wells, held his hat to Ben,
who, after glancing his eye at the petitioner's well worn broom,
instantly produced his twopence. "I wish I had more halfpence for you,
my good man," said he; "but I've only twopence." Hal came out of Mr. Millar's, the confectioner's shop, with a hatful of
cakes in his hand. Mr. Millar's dog was sitting on the flags before the
door, and he looked up with a wistful, begging eye at Hal, who was eating
a queen cake. Hal, who was wasteful even in his good-nature, threw a
whole queen cake to the dog, who swallowed it for a single mouthful. "There goes twopence in the form of a queen cake," said Mr. Gresham. Hal next offered some of his cakes to his uncle and cousin; but they
thanked him, and refused to eat any, because, they said, they were not
hungry; so he ate and ate as he walked along, till at last he stopped,
and said, "This bun tastes so bad after the queen cakes, I can't bear
it!" and he was going to fling it from him into the river. "Oh, it is a pity to waste that good bun; we may be glad of it yet," said
Ben; "give it me rather than throw it away." "Why, I thought you said you were not hungry," said Hal. "True, I am not hungry now; but that is no reason why I should never be
hungry again." "Well, there is the cake for you. Take it; for it has made me sick, and
I don't care what becomes of it." Ben folded the refuse bit of his cousin's bun in a piece of paper, and
put it into his pocket. "I'm beginning to be exceeding tired or sick or something," said Hal;
"and as there is a stand of coaches somewhere hereabouts, had not we
better take a coach, instead of walking all the way to Bristol?" "For a stout archer," said Mr. Gresham, "you are more easily tired than
one might have expected. However, with all my heart, let us take a
coach, for Ben asked me to show him the cathedral yesterday; and I
believe I should find it rather too much for me to walk so far, though I
am not sick with eating good things." "THE CATHEDRAL!" said Hal, after he had been seated in the coach about a
quarter of an hour, and had somewhat recovered from his sickness--"the
cathedral! Why, are we only going to Bristol to see the cathedral? I
thought we came out to see about a uniform." There was a dulness and melancholy kind of stupidity in Hal's countenance
as he pronounced these words, like one wakening from a dream, which made
both his uncle and his cousin burst out a-laughing. "Why," said Hal, who was now piqued, "I'm sure you did say, uncle, you
would go to Mr. Hall's to choose the cloth for the uniform." "Very true, and so I will," said Mr. Gresham; "but we need not make a
whole morning's work, need we, of looking at a piece of cloth? Cannot we
see a uniform and a cathedral both in one morning?" They went first to the cathedral. Hal's head was too full of the uniform
to take any notice of the painted window, which immediately caught Ben's
embarrassed attention. He looked at the large stained figures on the
Gothic window, and he observed their coloured shadows on the floor and
walls. Mr. Gresham, who perceived that he was eager on all subjects to gain
information, took this opportunity of telling him several things about
the lost art of painting on glass, Gothic arches, etc., which Hal thought
extremely tiresome. "Come! come! we shall be late indeed," said Hal; "surely you've looked
long enough, Ben, at this blue and red window." "I'm only thinking about these coloured shadows," said Ben. "I can show you when we go home, Ben," said his uncle, "an entertaining
paper upon such shadows. "*

*Vide "Priestley's History of Vision," chapter on coloured shadows. "Hark!"