2:7 And thou shalt speak my words unto them, whether they will hear,
or whether they will forbear: for they are most rebellious. 2:8 But thou, son of man, hear what I say unto thee; Be not thou
rebellious like that rebellious house: open thy mouth, and eat that I
give thee. 2:9 And when I looked, behold, an hand was sent unto me; and, lo, a
roll of a book was therein; 2:10 And he spread it before me; and it
was written within and without: and there was written therein
lamentations, and mourning, and woe. 3:1 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, eat that thou findest; eat
this roll, and go speak unto the house of Israel. 3:2 So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat that roll. 3:3 And he said unto me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill
thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then did I eat it; and it
was in my mouth as honey for sweetness. 3:4 And he said unto me, Son of man, go, get thee unto the house of
Israel, and speak with my words unto them. 3:5 For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech and of an
hard language, but to the house of Israel; 3:6 Not to many people of a
strange speech and of an hard language, whose words thou canst not
understand. Surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened
unto thee. 3:7 But the house of Israel will not hearken unto thee; for they will
not hearken unto me: for all the house of Israel are impudent and
hardhearted. 3:8 Behold, I have made thy face strong against their faces, and thy
forehead strong against their foreheads. 3:9 As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead: fear
them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a
rebellious house. 3:10 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, all my words that I shall
speak unto thee receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears. 3:11 And go, get thee to them of the captivity, unto the children of
thy people, and speak unto them, and tell them, Thus saith the Lord
GOD; whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear. 3:12 Then the spirit took me up, and I heard behind me a voice of a
great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of the LORD from his
place. 3:13 I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures that
touched one another, and the noise of the wheels over against them,
and a noise of a great rushing. 3:14 So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away, and I went in
bitterness, in the heat of my spirit; but the hand of the LORD was
strong upon me. 3:15 Then I came to them of the captivity at Telabib, that dwelt by
the river of Chebar, and I sat where they sat, and remained there
astonished among them seven days. 3:16 And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of
the LORD came unto me, saying, 3:17 Son of man, I have made thee a
watchman unto the house of Israel: therefore hear the word at my
mouth, and give them warning from me. 3:18 When I say unto the wicked, Thou shalt surely die; and thou
givest him not warning, nor speakest to warn the wicked from his
wicked way, to save his life; the same wicked man shall die in his
iniquity; but his blood will I require at thine hand. 3:19 Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness,
nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou hast
delivered thy soul. 3:20 Again, When a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness, and
commit iniquity, and I lay a stumbling-block before him, he shall die:
because thou hast not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and
his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered; but his
blood will I require at thine hand. 3:21 Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous
sin not, and he doth not sin, he shall surely live, because he is
warned; also thou hast delivered thy soul. 3:22 And the hand of the LORD was there upon me; and he said unto me,
Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will there talk with thee. 3:23 Then I arose, and went forth into the plain: and, behold, the
glory of the LORD stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river
of Chebar: and I fell on my face. 3:24 Then the spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet, and
spake with me, and said unto me, Go, shut thyself within thine house. 3:25 But thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee,
and shall bind thee with them, and thou shalt not go out among them:
3:26 And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that
thou shalt be dumb, and shalt not be to them a reprover: for they are
a rebellious house. 3:27 But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shalt
say unto them, Thus saith the Lord GOD; He that heareth, let him hear;
and he that forbeareth, let him forbear: for they are a rebellious
house. 4:1 Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee,
and pourtray upon it the city, even Jerusalem: 4:2 And lay siege
against it, and build a fort against it, and cast a mount against it;
set the camp also against it, and set battering rams against it round
about. 4:3 Moreover take thou unto thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of
iron between thee and the city: and set thy face against it, and it
shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it. This shall be
a sign to the house of Israel. 4:4 Lie thou also upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the
house of Israel upon it: according to the number of the days that thou
shalt lie upon it thou shalt bear their iniquity. 4:5 For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity, according
to the number of the days, three hundred and ninety days: so shalt
thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel. 4:6 And when thou hast accomplished them, lie again on thy right side,
and thou shalt bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: I
have appointed thee each day for a year. 4:7 Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem,
and thine arm shall be uncovered, and thou shalt prophesy against it. 4:8 And, behold, I will lay bands upon thee, and thou shalt not turn
thee from one side to another, till thou hast ended the days of thy
siege. 4:9 Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and
lentiles, and millet, and fitches, and put them in one vessel, and
make thee bread thereof, according to the number of the days that thou
shalt lie upon thy side, three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat
thereof. 4:10 And thy meat which thou shalt eat shall be by weight, twenty
shekels a day: from time to time shalt thou eat it. 4:11 Thou shalt drink also water by measure, the sixth part of an hin:
from time to time shalt thou drink. 4:12 And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes, and thou shalt bake it
with dung that cometh out of man, in their sight. 4:13 And the LORD said, Even thus shall the children of Israel eat
their defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them. 4:14 Then said I, Ah Lord GOD! behold, my soul hath not been polluted:
for from my youth up even till now have I not eaten of that which
dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; neither came there abominable
flesh into my mouth. 4:15 Then he said unto me, Lo, I have given thee cow's dung for man's
dung, and thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith. 4:16 Moreover he said unto me, Son of man, behold, I will break the
staff of bread in Jerusalem: and they shall eat bread by weight, and
with care; and they shall drink water by measure, and with
astonishment: 4:17 That they may want bread and water, and be astonied
one with another, and consume away for their iniquity. 5:1 And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife, take thee a
barber's razor, and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy
beard: then take thee balances to weigh, and divide the hair. 5:2 Thou shalt burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city,
when the days of the siege are fulfilled: and thou shalt take a third
part, and smite about it with a knife: and a third part thou shalt
scatter in the wind; and I will draw out a sword after them. 5:3 Thou shalt also take thereof a few in number, and bind them in thy
skirts. 5:4 Then take of them again, and cast them into the midst of the fire,
and burn them in the fire; for thereof shall a fire come forth into
all the house of Israel. 5:5 Thus saith the Lord GOD; This is Jerusalem: I have set it in the
midst of the nations and countries that are round about her. 5:6 And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the
nations, and my statutes more than the countries that are round about
her: for they have refused my judgments and my statutes, they have not
walked in them. 5:7 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Because ye multiplied more than
the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my
statutes, neither have kept my judgments, neither have done according
to the judgments of the nations that are round about you; 5:8
Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD; Behold, I, even I, am against thee,
and will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the
nations. 5:9 And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and whereunto I
will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations. 5:10 Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee,
and the sons shall eat their fathers; and I will execute judgments in
thee, and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds. 5:11 Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord GOD; Surely, because thou
hast defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all
thine abominations, therefore will I also diminish thee; neither shall
mine eye spare, neither will I have any pity. 5:12 A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and with
famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee: and a third part
shall fall by the sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third
part into all the winds, and I will draw out a sword after them. 5:13 Thus shall mine anger be accomplished, and I will cause my fury
to rest upon them, and I will be comforted: and they shall know that I
the LORD have spoken it in my zeal, when I have accomplished my fury
in them. 5:14 Moreover I will make thee waste, and a reproach among the nations
that are round about thee, in the sight of all that pass by. 5:15 So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, an instruction and an
astonishment unto the nations that are round about thee, when I shall
execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury and in furious rebukes. I the LORD have spoken it. 5:16 When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine, which
shall be for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy you:
and I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of
bread: 5:17 So will I send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they
shall bereave thee: and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee;
and I will bring the sword upon thee. I the LORD have spoken it. 6:1 And the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 6:2 Son of man, set
thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy against them,
6:3 And say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the Lord GOD;
Thus saith the Lord GOD to the mountains, and to the hills, to the
rivers, and to the valleys; Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon
you, and I will destroy your high places. 6:4 And your altars shall be desolate, and your images shall be
broken: and I will cast down your slain men before your idols. 6:5 And I will lay the dead carcases of the children of Israel before
their idols; and I will scatter your bones round about your altars. 6:6 In all your dwellingplaces the cities shall be laid waste, and the
high places shall be desolate; that your altars may be laid waste and
made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your images
may be cut down, and your works may be abolished. 6:7 And the slain shall fall in the midst of you, and ye shall know
that I am the LORD. 6:8 Yet will I leave a remnant, that ye may have some that shall
escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through
the countries. 6:9 And they that escape of you shall remember me among the nations
whither they shall be carried captives, because I am broken with their
whorish heart, which hath departed from me, and with their eyes, which
go a whoring after their idols: and they shall lothe themselves for
the evils which they have committed in all their abominations. 6:10 And they shall know that I am the LORD, and that I have not said
in vain that I would do this evil unto them. 6:11 Thus saith the Lord GOD; Smite with thine hand, and stamp with
thy foot, and say, Alas for all the evil abominations of the house of
Israel! for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence. 6:12 He that is far off shall die of the pestilence; and he that is
near shall fall by the sword; and he that remaineth and is besieged
shall die by the famine: thus will I accomplish my fury upon them. 6:13 Then shall ye know that I am the LORD, when their slain men shall
be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill,
in all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and
under every thick oak, the place where they did offer sweet savour to
all their idols. 6:14 So will I stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land
desolate, yea, more desolate than the wilderness toward Diblath, in
all their habitations: and they shall know that I am the LORD. 7:1 Moreover the word of the LORD came unto me, saying, 7:2 Also, thou
son of man, thus saith the Lord GOD unto the land of Israel; An end,
the end is come upon the four corners of the land. 7:3 Now is the end come upon thee, and I will send mine anger upon
thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, and will recompense
upon thee all thine abominations. 7:4 And mine eye shall not spare thee, neither will I have pity: but I
will recompense thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in
the midst of thee: and ye shall know that I am the LORD. 7:5 Thus saith the Lord GOD; An evil, an only evil, behold, is come. 7:6 An end is come, the end is come: it watcheth for thee; behold, it
is come. 7:7 The morning is come unto thee, O thou that dwellest in the land:
the time is come, the day of trouble is near, and not the sounding
again of the mountains. 7:8 Now will I shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and accomplish mine
anger upon thee: and I will judge thee according to thy ways, and will
recompense thee for all thine abominations. 7:9 And mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity: I will
recompense thee according to thy ways and thine abominations that are
in the midst of thee; and ye shall know that I am the LORD that
smiteth. 7:10 Behold the day, behold, it is come: the morning is gone forth;
the rod hath blossomed, pride hath budded. 7:11 Violence is risen up into a rod of wickedness: none of them shall
remain, nor of their multitude, nor of any of their's: neither shall
there be wailing for them. 7:12 The time is come, the day draweth near: let not the buyer
rejoice, nor the seller mourn: for wrath is upon all the multitude
thereof. 7:13 For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although
they were yet alive: for the vision is touching the whole multitude
thereof, which shall not return; neither shall any strengthen himself
in the iniquity of his life. 7:14 They have blown the trumpet, even to make all ready; but none
goeth to the battle: for my wrath is upon all the multitude thereof. 7:15 The sword is without, and the pestilence and the famine within:
he that is in the field shall die with the sword; and he that is in
the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him. 7:16 But they that escape of them shall escape, and shall be on the
mountains like doves of the valleys, all of them mourning, every one
for his iniquity. 7:17 All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water. 7:18 They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall
cover them; and shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all
their heads. 7:19 They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall
be removed: their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver
them in the day of the wrath of the LORD: they shall not satisfy their
souls, neither fill their bowels: because it is the stumblingblock of
their iniquity. 7:20 As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty: but they
made the images of their abominations and of their detestable things
therein: therefore have I set it far from them. 7:21 And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey,
and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil; and they shall pollute it. 7:22 My face will I turn also from them, and they shall pollute my
secret place: for the robbers shall enter into it, and defile it. 7:23 Make a chain: for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city
is full of violence. 7:24 Wherefore I will bring the worst of the heathen, and they shall
possess their houses: I will also make the pomp of the strong to
cease; and their holy places shall be defiled. 7:25 Destruction cometh; and they shall seek peace, and there shall be
none.