They did not even know what hour of the day it was; and when,
turning a corner, they saw the bare tunnel of the corridor end
abruptly in a shining square of garden, the grass burning in that
strong evening sunshine which makes it burnished gold rather than
green, the abrupt opening on to the earth seemed like a hole
knocked in the wall of heaven. Only once or twice in life is it
permitted to a man thus to see the very universe from outside,
and feel existence itself as an adorable adventure not yet begun. As they found this shining escape out of that hellish labyrinth
they both had simultaneously the sensation of being babes unborn,
of being asked by God if they would like to live upon the earth. They were looking in at one of the seven gates of Eden. Turnbull was the first to leap into the garden, with an
earth-spurning leap like that of one who could really spread his
wings and fly. MacIan, who came an instant after, was less full
of mere animal gusto and fuller of a more fearful and quivering
pleasure in the clear and innocent flower colours and the high
and holy trees. With one bound they were in that cool and cleared
landscape, and they found just outside the door the black-clad
gentleman with the cloven chin smilingly regarding them; and his
chin seemed to grow longer and longer as he smiled. XVIII. A RIDDLE OF FACES

Just behind him stood two other doctors: one, the familiar Dr.
Quayle, of the blinking eyes and bleating voice; the other, a
more commonplace but much more forcible figure, a stout young
doctor with short, well-brushed hair and a round but resolute
face. At the sight of the escape these two subordinates uttered a
cry and sprang forward, but their superior remained motionless
and smiling, and somehow the lack of his support seemed to arrest
and freeze them in the very gesture of pursuit. "Let them be," he cried in a voice that cut like a blade of ice;
and not only of ice, but of some awful primordial ice that had
never been water. "I want no devoted champions," said the cutting voice; "even the
folly of one's friends bores one at last. You don't suppose I
should have let these lunatics out of their cells without good
reason. I have the best and fullest reason. They can be let out
of their cell today, because today the whole world has become
their cell. I will have no more medieval mummery of chains and
doors. Let them wander about the earth as they wandered about
this garden, and I shall still be their easy master. Let them
take the wings of the morning and abide in the uttermost parts of
the sea--I am there. Whither shall they go from my presence and
whither shall they flee from my spirit? Courage, Dr. Quayle, and
do not be downhearted; the real days of tyranny are only
beginning on this earth." And with that the Master laughed and swung away from them, almost
as if his laugh was a bad thing for people to see. "Might I speak to you a moment?" said Turnbull, stepping forward
with a respectful resolution. But the shoulders of the Master
only seemed to take on a new and unexpected angle of mockery as
he strode away. Turnbull swung round with great abruptness to the other two
doctors, and said, harshly: "What in snakes does he mean--and who
are you?" "My name is Hutton," said the short, stout man, "and I am--well,
one of those whose business it is to uphold this establishment." "My name is Turnbull," said the other; "I am one of those whose
business it is to tear it to the ground." The small doctor smiled, and Turnbull's anger seemed suddenly to
steady him. "But I don't want to talk about that," he said, calmly; "I only
want to know what the Master of this asylum really means." Dr. Hutton's smile broke into a laugh which, short as it was, had
the suspicion of a shake in it. "I suppose you think that quite a
simple question," he said. "I think it a plain question," said Turnbull, "and one that
deserves a plain answer. Why did the Master lock us up in a
couple of cupboards like jars of pickles for a mortal month, and
why does he now let us walk free in the garden again?" "I understand," said Hutton, with arched eyebrows, "that your
complaint is that you are now free to walk in the garden." "My complaint is," said Turnbull, stubbornly, "that if I am fit
to walk freely now, I have been as fit for the last month. No one
has examined me, no one has come near me. Your chief says that I
am only free because he has made other arrangements. What are
those arrangements?" The young man with the round face looked down for a little while
and smoked reflectively. The other and elder doctor had gone
pacing nervously by himself upon the lawn. At length the round
face was lifted again, and showed two round blue eyes with a
certain frankness in them. "Well, I don't see that it can do any harm to tell you know," he
said. "You were shut up just then because it was just during that
month that the Master was bringing off his big scheme. He was
getting his bill through Parliament, and organizing the new
medical police. But of course you haven't heard of all that; in
fact, you weren't meant to." "Heard of all what?" asked the impatient inquirer. "There's a new law now, and the asylum powers are greatly
extended. Even if you did escape now, any policeman would take
you up in the next town if you couldn't show a certificate of
sanity from us." "Well," continued Dr. Hutton, "the Master described before both
Houses of Parliament the real scientific objection to all
existing legislation about lunacy. As he very truly said, the
mistake was in supposing insanity to be merely an exception or an
extreme. Insanity, like forgetfulness, is simply a quality which
enters more or less into all human beings; and for practical
purposes it is more necessary to know whose mind is really
trustworthy than whose has some accidental taint. We have
therefore reversed the existing method, and people now have to
prove that they are sane. In the first village you entered, the
village constable would notice that you were not wearing on the
left lapel of your coat the small pewter S which is now necessary
to any one who walks about beyond asylum bounds or outside asylum
hours." "You mean to say," said Turnbull, "that this was what the Master
of the asylum urged before the House of Commons?" Dr. Hutton nodded with gravity. "And you mean to say," cried Turnbull, with a vibrant snort,
"that that proposal was passed in an assembly that calls itself
democratic?" The doctor showed his whole row of teeth in a smile. "Oh, the
assembly calls itself Socialist now," he said, "But we explained
to them that this was a question for men of science." Turnbull gave one stamp upon the gravel, then pulled himself
together, and resumed: "But why should your infernal head
medicine-man lock us up in separate cells while he was turning
England into a madhouse? I'm not the Prime Minister; we're not
the House of Lords." "He wasn't afraid of the Prime Minister," replied Dr. Hutton; "he
isn't afraid of the House of Lords. But----"

"Well?" inquired Turnbull, stamping again. "He is afraid of you," said Hutton, simply. "Why, didn't you
know?" MacIan, who had not spoken yet, made one stride forward and stood
with shaking limbs and shining eyes. "He was afraid!" began Evan, thickly. "You mean to say that
we----"

"I mean to say the plain truth now that the danger is over," said
Hutton, calmly; "most certainly you two were the only people he
ever was afraid of." Then he added in a low but not inaudible
voice: "Except one--whom he feared worse, and has buried deeper." "Come away," cried MacIan, "this has to be thought about." Turnbull followed him in silence as he strode away, but just
before he vanished, turned and spoke again to the doctors. "But what has got hold of people?" he asked, abruptly. "Why
should all England have gone dotty on the mere subject of
dottiness?" Dr. Hutton smiled his open smile once more and bowed slightly. "As to that also," he replied, "I don't want to make you vain." Turnbull swung round without a word, and he and his companion
were lost in the lustrous leafage of the garden. They noticed
nothing special about the scene, except that the garden seemed
more exquisite than ever in the deepening sunset, and that there
seemed to be many more people, whether patients or attendants,
walking about in it. From behind the two black-coated doctors as they stood on the
lawn another figure somewhat similarly dressed strode hurriedly
past them, having also grizzled hair and an open flapping
frock-coat. Both his decisive step and dapper black array marked
him out as another medical man, or at least a man in authority,
and as he passed Turnbull the latter was aroused by a strong
impression of having seen the man somewhere before. It was no one
that he knew well, yet he was certain that it was someone at
whom he had at sometime or other looked steadily. It was neither
the face of a friend nor of an enemy; it aroused neither
irritation nor tenderness, yet it was a face which had for some
reason been of great importance in his life. Turning and
returning, and making detours about the garden, he managed to
study the man's face again and again--a moustached, somewhat
military face with a monocle, the sort of face that is
aristocratic without being distinguished. Turnbull could not
remember any particular doctors in his decidedly healthy
existence. Was the man a long-lost uncle, or was he only somebody
who had sat opposite him regularly in a railway train? At that
moment the man knocked down his own eye-glass with a gesture of
annoyance; Turnbull remembered the gesture, and the truth sprang
up solid in front of him. The man with the moustaches was
Cumberland Vane, the London police magistrate before whom he and
MacIan had once stood on their trial. The magistrate must have
been transferred to some other official duties--to something
connected with the inspection of asylums. Turnbull's heart gave a leap of excitement which was half hope. As a magistrate Mr. Cumberland Vane had been somewhat careless
and shallow, but certainly kindly, and not inaccessible to common
sense so long as it was put to him in strictly conventional
language. He was at least an authority of a more human and
refreshing sort than the crank with the wagging beard or the
fiend with the forked chin. He went straight up to the magistrate, and said: "Good evening,
Mr. Vane; I doubt if you remember me." Cumberland Vane screwed the eye-glass into his scowling face for
an instant, and then said curtly but not uncivilly: "Yes, I
remember you, sir; assault or battery, wasn't it?--a fellow broke
your window. A tall fellow--McSomething--case made rather a noise
afterwards." "MacIan is the name, sir," said Turnbull, respectfully; "I have
him here with me." "Eh!" said Vane very sharply. "Confound him!