3:16 Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life
for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. 3:17 But whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have
need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth
the love of God in him? 3:18 My little children, let us not love in
word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth. 3:19 And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our
hearts before him. 3:20 For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and
knoweth all things. 3:21 Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence
toward God. 3:22 And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his
commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight. 3:23 And this is his commandment, That we should believe on the name
of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us
commandment. 3:24 And he that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in
him. And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath
given us. 4:1 Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether
they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the
world. 4:2 Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: Every spirit that confesseth
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God: 4:3 And every spirit
that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of
God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that
it should come; and even now already is it in the world. 4:4 Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because
greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. 4:5 They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the
world heareth them. 4:6 We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of
God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit
of error. 4:7 Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every
one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. 4:8 He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. 4:9 In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God
sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through
him. 4:10 Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and
sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. 4:11 Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. 4:12 No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God
dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us. 4:13 Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he
hath given us of his Spirit. 4:14 And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to
be the Saviour of the world. 4:15 Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God
dwelleth in him, and he in God. 4:16 And we have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God
is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him. 4:17 Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the
day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world. 4:18 There is no fear in love; but perfect love casteth out fear:
because fear hath torment. He that feareth is not made perfect in
love. 4:19 We love him, because he first loved us. 4:20 If a man say, I love God, and hateth his brother, he is a liar:
for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen, how can he love
God whom he hath not seen? 4:21 And this commandment have we from
him, That he who loveth God love his brother also. 5:1 Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and
every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten
of him. 5:2 By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love
God, and keep his commandments. 5:3 For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments: and
his commandments are not grievous. 5:4 For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is
the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. 5:5 Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that
Jesus is the Son of God? 5:6 This is he that came by water and blood,
even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it
is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth. 5:7 For there are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost: and these three are one. 5:8 And there are three that bear witness in earth, the Spirit, and
the water, and the blood: and these three agree in one. 5:9 If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater:
for this is the witness of God which he hath testified of his Son. 5:10 He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself:
he that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth
not the record that God gave of his Son. 5:11 And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life,
and this life is in his Son. 5:12 He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of
God hath not life. 5:13 These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of
the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that
ye may believe on the name of the Son of God. 5:14 And this is the confidence that we have in him, that, if we ask
any thing according to his will, he heareth us: 5:15 And if we know
that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions
that we desired of him. 5:16 If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he
shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto
death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for
it. 5:17 All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death. 5:18 We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is
begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. 5:19 And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in
wickedness. 5:20 And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an
understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him
that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and
eternal life. 5:21 Little children, keep yourselves from idols. Amen. The Second Epistle General of John


1:1 The elder unto the elect lady and her children, whom I love in
the truth; and not I only, but also all they that have known the
truth; 1:2 For the truth's sake, which dwelleth in us, and shall be
with us for ever. 1:3 Grace be with you, mercy, and peace, from God the Father, and from
the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love. 1:4 I rejoiced greatly that I found of thy children walking in truth,
as we have received a commandment from the Father. 1:5 And now I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new
commandment unto thee, but that which we had from the beginning, that
we love one another. 1:6 And this is love, that we walk after his commandments. This is the
commandment, That, as ye have heard from the beginning, ye should walk
in it. 1:7 For many deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not
that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. This is a deceiver and an
antichrist. 1:8 Look to yourselves, that we lose not those things which we have
wrought, but that we receive a full reward. 1:9 Whosoever transgresseth, and abideth not in the doctrine of
Christ, hath not God. He that abideth in the doctrine of Christ, he
hath both the Father and the Son. 1:10 If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive
him not into your house, neither bid him God speed: 1:11 For he that
biddeth him God speed is partaker of his evil deeds. 1:12 Having many things to write unto you, I would not write with
paper and ink: but I trust to come unto you, and speak face to face,
that our joy may be full. 1:13 The children of thy elect sister greet thee. Amen. The Third Epistle General of John


1:1 The elder unto the wellbeloved Gaius, whom I love in the truth. 1:2 Beloved, I wish above all things that thou mayest prosper and be
in health, even as thy soul prospereth. 1:3 For I rejoiced greatly, when the brethren came and testified of
the truth that is in thee, even as thou walkest in the truth. 1:4 I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in truth. 1:5 Beloved, thou doest faithfully whatsoever thou doest to the
brethren, and to strangers; 1:6 Which have borne witness of thy
charity before the church: whom if thou bring forward on their journey
after a godly sort, thou shalt do well: 1:7 Because that for his
name's sake they went forth, taking nothing of the Gentiles. 1:8 We therefore ought to receive such, that we might be fellowhelpers
to the truth. 1:9 I wrote unto the church: but Diotrephes, who loveth to have the
preeminence among them, receiveth us not. 1:10 Wherefore, if I come, I will remember his deeds which he doeth,
prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith,
neither doth he himself receive the brethren, and forbiddeth them that
would, and casteth them out of the church. 1:11 Beloved, follow not that which is evil, but that which is good. He that doeth good is of God: but he that doeth evil hath not seen
God. 1:12 Demetrius hath good report of all men, and of the truth itself:
yea, and we also bear record; and ye know that our record is true. 1:13 I had many things to write, but I will not with ink and pen write
unto thee: 1:14 But I trust I shall shortly see thee, and we shall
speak face to face. Peace be to thee. Our friends salute thee. Greet
the friends by name. The General Epistle of Jude


1:1 Jude, the servant of Jesus Christ, and brother of James, to them
that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ,
and called: 1:2 Mercy unto you, and peace, and love, be multiplied. 1:3 Beloved, when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you
that ye should earnestly contend for the faith which was once
delivered unto the saints. 1:4 For there are certain men crept in unawares, who were before of
old ordained to this condemnation, ungodly men, turning the grace of
our God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ. 1:5 I will therefore put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this,
how that the Lord, having saved the people out of the land of Egypt,
afterward destroyed them that believed not. 1:6 And the angels which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, he hath reserved in everlasting chains under darkness
unto the judgment of the great day. 1:7 Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the cities about them in like
manner, giving themselves over to fornication, and going after strange
flesh, are set forth for an example, suffering the vengeance of
eternal fire. 1:8 Likewise also these filthy dreamers defile the flesh, despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. 1:9 Yet Michael the archangel, when contending with the devil he
disputed about the body of Moses, durst not bring against him a
railing accusation, but said, The Lord rebuke thee. 1:10 But these speak evil of those things which they know not: but
what they know naturally, as brute beasts, in those things they
corrupt themselves. 1:11 Woe unto them! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran
greedily after the error of Balaam for reward, and perished in the
gainsaying of Core. 1:12 These are spots in your feasts of charity, when they feast with
you, feeding themselves without fear: clouds they are without water,
carried about of winds; trees whose fruit withereth, without fruit,
twice dead, plucked up by the roots; 1:13 Raging waves of the sea,
foaming out their own shame; wandering stars, to whom is reserved the
blackness of darkness for ever.