I believe you to be a low, gibbering
degenerate. Let us see the head of the asylum." "See the head of the asylum," repeated Dr. Quayle. "Certainly
not." The tall Highlander, bending over him, put one hand on his
shoulder with fatherly interest. "You don't seem to appreciate the peculiar advantages of my
position as a lunatic," he said. "I could kill you with my left
hand before such a rat as you could so much as squeak. And I
wouldn't be hanged for it." "I certainly agree with Mr. MacIan," said Turnbull with sobriety
and perfect respectfulness, "that you had better let us see the
head of the institution." Dr. Quayle got to his feet in a mixture of sudden hysteria and
clumsy presence of mind. "Oh, certainly," he said with a weak laugh. "You can see the head
of the asylum if you particularly want to." He almost ran out of
the room, and the two followed swiftly on his flying coat tails. He knocked at an ordinary varnished door in the corridor. When a
voice said, "Come in," MacIan's breath went hissing back through
his teeth into his chest. Turnbull was more impetuous, and opened
the door. It was a neat and well-appointed room entirely lined with a
medical library. At the other end of it was a ponderous and
polished desk with an incandescent lamp on it, the light of which
was just sufficient to show a slender, well-bred figure in an
ordinary medical black frock-coat, whose head, quite silvered
with age, was bent over neat piles of notes. This gentleman
looked up for an instant as they entered, and the lamplight fell
on his glittering spectacles and long, clean-shaven face--a face
which would have been simply like an aristocrat's but that a
certain lion poise of the head and long cleft in the chin made it
look more like a very handsome actor's. It was only for a flash
that his face was thus lifted. Then he bent his silver head over
his notes once more, and said, without looking up again:

"I told you, Dr. Quayle, that these men were to go to cells B and
C."

Turnbull and MacIan looked at each other, and said more than they
could ever say with tongues or swords. Among other things they
said that to that particular Head of the institution it was a
waste of time to appeal, and they followed Dr. Quayle out of the
room. The instant they stepped out into the corridor four sturdy
figures stepped from four sides, pinioned them, and ran them
along the galleries. They might very likely have thrown their
captors right and left had they been inclined to resist, but for
some nameless reason they were more inclined to laugh. A mixture
of mad irony with childish curiosity made them feel quite
inclined to see what next twist would be taken by their imbecile
luck. They were dragged down countless cold avenues lined with
glazed tiles, different only in being of different lengths and
set at different angles. They were so many and so monotonous that
to escape back by them would have been far harder than fleeing
from the Hampton Court maze. Only the fact that windows grew
fewer, coming at longer intervals, and the fact that when the
windows did come they seemed shadowed and let in less light,
showed that they were winding into the core or belly of some
enormous building. After a little time the glazed corridors began
to be lit by electricity. At last, when they had walked nearly a mile in those white and
polished tunnels, they came with quite a shock to the futile
finality of a cul-de-sac. All that white and weary journey ended
suddenly in an oblong space and a blank white wall. But in the
white wall there were two iron doors painted white on which were
written, respectively, in neat black capitals B and C.

"You go in here, sir," said the leader of the officials, quite
respectfully, "and you in here." But before the doors had clanged upon their dazed victims, MacIan
had been able to say to Turnbull with a strange drawl of
significance: "I wonder who A is." Turnbull made an automatic struggle before he allowed himself to
be thrown into the cell. Hence it happened that he was the last
to enter, and was still full of the exhilaration of the
adventures for at least five minutes after the echo of the
clanging door had died away. Then, when silence had sunk deep and nothing happened for two and
a half hours, it suddenly occurred to him that this was the end
of his life. He was hidden and sealed up in this little crack of
stone until the flesh should fall off his bones. He was dead, and
the world had won. His cell was of an oblong shape, but very long in comparison with
its width. It was just wide enough to permit the arms to be fully
extended with the dumb-bells, which were hung up on the left
wall, very dusty. It was, however, long enough for a man to walk
one thirty-fifth part of a mile if he traversed it entirely. On
the same principle a row of fixed holes, quite close together,
let in to the cells by pipes what was alleged to be the freshest
air. For these great scientific organizers insisted that a man
should be healthy even if he was miserable. They provided a walk
long enough to give him exercise and holes large enough to give
him oxygen. There their interest in human nature suddenly ceased. It seemed never to have occurred to them that the benefit of
exercise belongs partly to the benefit of liberty. They had not
entertained the suggestion that the open air is only one of the
advantages of the open sky. They administered air in secret, but
in sufficient doses, as if it were a medicine. They suggested
walking, as if no man had ever felt inclined to walk. Above all,
the asylum authorities insisted on their own extraordinary
cleanliness. Every morning, while Turnbull was still half asleep
on his iron bedstead which was lifted half-way up the wall and
clamped to it with iron, four sluices or metal mouths opened
above him at the four corners of the chamber and washed it white
of any defilement. Turnbull's solitary soul surged up against
this sickening daily solemnity. "I am buried alive!" he cried, bitterly; "they have hidden me
under mountains. I shall be here till I rot. Why the blazes
should it matter to them whether I am dirty or clean." Every morning and evening an iron hatchway opened in his oblong
cell, and a brown hairy hand or two thrust in a plate of
perfectly cooked lentils and a big bowl of cocoa. He was not
underfed any more than he was underexercised or asphyxiated. He
had ample walking space, ample air, ample and even filling food. The only objection was that he had nothing to walk towards,
nothing to feast about, and no reason whatever for drawing the
breath of life. Even the shape of his cell especially irritated him. It was a
long, narrow parallelogram, which had a flat wall at one end and
ought to have had a flat wall at the other; but that end was
broken by a wedge or angle of space, like the prow of a ship. After three days of silence and cocoa, this angle at the end
began to infuriate Turnbull. It maddened him to think that two
lines came together and pointed at nothing. After the fifth day
he was reckless, and poked his head into the corner. After
twenty-five days he almost broke his head against it. Then he
became quite cool and stupid again, and began to examine it like
a sort of Robinson Crusoe. Almost unconsciously it was his instinct to examine outlets, and
he found himself paying particular attention to the row of holes
which let in the air into his last house of life. He soon
discovered that these air-holes were all the ends and mouths of
long leaden tubes which doubtless carried air from some remote
watering-place near Margate. One evening while he was engaged in
the fifth investigation he noticed something like twilight in one
of these dumb mouths, as compared with the darkness of the
others. Thrusting his finger in as far as it would go, he found a
hole and flapping edge in the tube. This he rent open and
instantly saw a light behind; it was at least certain that he had
struck some other cell. It is a characteristic of all things now called "efficient",
which means mechanical and calculated, that if they go wrong at
all they go entirely wrong. There is no power of retrieving a
defeat, as in simpler and more living organisms. A strong gun can
conquer a strong elephant, but a wounded elephant can easily
conquer a broken gun. Thus the Prussian monarchy in the
eighteenth century, or now, can make a strong army merely by
making the men afraid. But it does it with the permanent
possibility that the men may some day be more afraid of their
enemies than of their officers. Thus the drainage in our cities
so long as it is quite solid means a general safety, but if there
is one leak it means concentrated poison--an explosion of deathly
germs like dynamite, a spirit of stink. Thus, indeed, all that
excellent machinery which is the swiftest thing on earth in
saving human labour is also the slowest thing on earth in
resisting human interference. It may be easier to get chocolate
for nothing out of a shopkeeper than out of an automatic machine. But if you did manage to steal the chocolate, the automatic
machine would be much less likely to run after you. Turnbull was not long in discovering this truth in connexion with
the cold and colossal machinery of this great asylum. He had been
shaken by many spiritual states since the instant when he was
pitched head foremost into that private cell which was to be his
private room till death. He had felt a high fit of pride and
poetry, which had ebbed away and left him deadly cold. He had
known a period of mere scientific curiosity, in the course of
which he examined all the tiles of his cell, with the gratifying
conclusion that they were all the same shape and size; but was
greatly puzzled about the angle in the wall at the end, and also
about an iron peg or spike that stood out from the wall, the
object of which he does not know to this day. Then he had a
period of mere madness not to be written of by decent men, but
only by those few dirty novelists hallooed on by the infernal
huntsman to hunt down and humiliate human nature. This also
passed, but left behind it a feverish distaste for many of the
mere objects around him. Long after he had returned to sanity and
such hopeless cheerfulness as a man might have on a desert
island, he disliked the regular squares of the pattern of wall
and floor and the triangle that terminated his corridor. Above
all, he had a hatred, deep as the hell he did not believe in, for
the objectless iron peg in the wall. But in all his moods, sane or insane, intolerant or stoical, he
never really doubted this: that the machine held him as light and
as hopelessly as he had from his birth been held by the hopeless
cosmos of his own creed. He knew well the ruthless and
inexhaustible resources of our scientific civilization. He no
more expected rescue from a medical certificate than rescue from
the solar system. In many of his Robinson Crusoe moods he thought
kindly of MacIan as of some quarrelsome school-fellow who had
long been dead. He thought of leaving in the cell when he died a
rigid record of his opinions, and when he began to write them
down on scraps of envelope in his pocket, he was startled to
discover how much they had changed. Then he remembered the
Beauchamp Tower, and tried to write his blazing scepticism on the
wall, and discovered that it was all shiny tiles on which nothing
could be either drawn or carved. Then for an instant there hung
and broke above him like a high wave the whole horror of
scientific imprisonment, which manages to deny a man not only
liberty, but every accidental comfort of bondage. In the old
filthy dungeons men could carve their prayers or protests in the
rock. Here the white and slippery walls escaped even from bearing
witness. The old prisoners could make a pet of a mouse or a
beetle strayed out of a hole. Here the unpierceable walls were
washed every morning by an automatic sluice.