33:16 And he repaired the altar of the LORD, and sacrificed thereon
peace offerings and thank offerings, and commanded Judah to serve the
LORD God of Israel. 33:17 Nevertheless the people did sacrifice still in the high places,
yet unto the LORD their God only. 33:18 Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer unto his
God, and the words of the seers that spake to him in the name of the
LORD God of Israel, behold, they are written in the book of the kings
of Israel. 33:19 His prayer also, and how God was intreated of him, and all his
sins, and his trespass, and the places wherein he built high places,
and set up groves and graven images, before he was humbled: behold,
they are written among the sayings of the seers. 33:20 So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his
own house: and Amon his son reigned in his stead. 33:21 Amon was two and twenty years old when he began to reign, and
reigned two years in Jerusalem. 33:22 But he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD, as did
Manasseh his father: for Amon sacrificed unto all the carved images
which Manasseh his father had made, and served them; 33:23 And humbled
not himself before the LORD, as Manasseh his father had humbled
himself; but Amon trespassed more and more. 33:24 And his servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own
house. 33:25 But the people of the land slew all them that had conspired
against king Amon; and the people of the land made Josiah his son king
in his stead. 34:1 Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned
in Jerusalem one and thirty years. 34:2 And he did that which was right in the sight of the LORD, and
walked in the ways of David his father, and declined neither to the
right hand, nor to the left. 34:3 For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he
began to seek after the God of David his father: and in the twelfth
year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and
the groves, and the carved images, and the molten images. 34:4 And they brake down the altars of Baalim in his presence; and the
images, that were on high above them, he cut down; and the groves, and
the carved images, and the molten images, he brake in pieces, and made
dust of them, and strowed it upon the graves of them that had
sacrificed unto them. 34:5 And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and
cleansed Judah and Jerusalem. 34:6 And so did he in the cities of Manasseh, and Ephraim, and Simeon,
even unto Naphtali, with their mattocks round about. 34:7 And when he had broken down the altars and the groves, and had
beaten the graven images into powder, and cut down all the idols
throughout all the land of Israel, he returned to Jerusalem. 34:8 Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the
land, and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah
the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to
repair the house of the LORD his God. 34:9 And when they came to Hilkiah the high priest, they delivered the
money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites that
kept the doors had gathered of the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and
of all the remnant of Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin; and they
returned to Jerusalem. 34:10 And they put it in the hand of the workmen that had the
oversight of the house of the LORD, and they gave it to the workmen
that wrought in the house of the LORD, to repair and amend the house:
34:11 Even to the artificers and builders gave they it, to buy hewn
stone, and timber for couplings, and to floor the houses which the
kings of Judah had destroyed. 34:12 And the men did the work faithfully: and the overseers of them
were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari; and
Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set it
forward; and other of the Levites, all that could skill of instruments
of musick. 34:13 Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and were overseers
of all that wrought the work in any manner of service: and of the
Levites there were scribes, and officers, and porters. 34:14 And when they brought out the money that was brought into the
house of the LORD, Hilkiah the priest found a book of the law of the
LORD given by Moses. 34:15 And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have
found the book of the law in the house of the LORD. And Hilkiah
delivered the book to Shaphan. 34:16 And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and brought the king
word back again, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they
do it. 34:17 And they have gathered together the money that was found in the
house of the LORD, and have delivered it into the hand of the
overseers, and to the hand of the workmen. 34:18 Then Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the
priest hath given me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king. 34:19 And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the
law, that he rent his clothes. 34:20 And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan,
and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah a
servant of the king's, saying, 34:21 Go, enquire of the LORD for me,
and for them that are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the
words of the book that is found: for great is the wrath of the LORD
that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word
of the LORD, to do after all that is written in this book. 34:22 And Hilkiah, and they that the king had appointed, went to
Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvath, the son
of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe; (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the
college:) and they spake to her to that effect. 34:23 And she answered them, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel, Tell
ye the man that sent you to me, 34:24 Thus saith the LORD, Behold, I
will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants thereof,
even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read
before the king of Judah: 34:25 Because they have forsaken me, and
have burned incense unto other gods, that they might provoke me to
anger with all the works of their hands; therefore my wrath shall be
poured out upon this place, and shall not be quenched. 34:26 And as for the king of Judah, who sent you to enquire of the
LORD, so shall ye say unto him, Thus saith the LORD God of Israel
concerning the words which thou hast heard; 34:27 Because thine heart
was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before God, when thou
heardest his words against this place, and against the inhabitants
thereof, and humbledst thyself before me, and didst rend thy clothes,
and weep before me; I have even heard thee also, saith the LORD. 34:28 Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shalt be
gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the
evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of
the same. So they brought the king word again. 34:29 Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah
and Jerusalem. 34:30 And the king went up into the house of the LORD, and all the men
of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the
Levites, and all the people, great and small: and he read in their
ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the
house of the LORD. 34:31 And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before the
LORD, to walk after the LORD, and to keep his commandments, and his
testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his
soul, to perform the words of the covenant which are written in this
book. 34:32 And he caused all that were present in Jerusalem and Benjamin to
stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the
covenant of God, the God of their fathers. 34:33 And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the
countries that pertained to the children of Israel, and made all that
were present in Israel to serve, even to serve the LORD their God. And
all his days they departed not from following the LORD, the God of
their fathers. 35:1 Moreover Josiah kept a passover unto the LORD in Jerusalem: and
they killed the passover on the fourteenth day of the first month. 35:2 And he set the priests in their charges, and encouraged them to
the service of the house of the LORD, 35:3 And said unto the Levites
that taught all Israel, which were holy unto the LORD, Put the holy
ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel did
build; it shall not be a burden upon your shoulders: serve now the
LORD your God, and his people Israel, 35:4 And prepare yourselves by
the houses of your fathers, after your courses, according to the
writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of
Solomon his son. 35:5 And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the
families of the fathers of your brethren the people, and after the
division of the families of the Levites. 35:6 So kill the passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare your
brethren, that they may do according to the word of the LORD by the
hand of Moses. 35:7 And Josiah gave to the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all
for the passover offerings, for all that were present, to the number
of thirty thousand, and three thousand bullocks: these were of the
king's substance. 35:8 And his princes gave willingly unto the people, to the priests,
and to the Levites: Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, rulers of the
house of God, gave unto the priests for the passover offerings two
thousand and six hundred small cattle and three hundred oxen. 35:9 Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethaneel, his brethren, and
Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, chief of the Levites, gave unto the
Levites for passover offerings five thousand small cattle, and five
hundred oxen. 35:10 So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their
place, and the Levites in their courses, according to the king's
commandment. 35:11 And they killed the passover, and the priests sprinkled the
blood from their hands, and the Levites flayed them. 35:12 And they removed the burnt offerings, that they might give
according to the divisions of the families of the people, to offer
unto the LORD, as it is written in the book of Moses. And so did they
with the oxen. 35:13 And they roasted the passover with fire according to the
ordinance: but the other holy offerings sod they in pots, and in
caldrons, and in pans, and divided them speedily among all the people. 35:14 And afterward they made ready for themselves, and for the
priests: because the priests the sons of Aaron were busied in offering
of burnt offerings and the fat until night; therefore the Levites
prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron. 35:15 And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place, according
to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the
king's seer; and the porters waited at every gate; they might not
depart from their service; for their brethren the Levites prepared for
them. 35:16 So all the service of the LORD was prepared the same day, to
keep the passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of the
LORD, according to the commandment of king Josiah. 35:17 And the children of Israel that were present kept the passover
at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days. 35:18 And there was no passover like to that kept in Israel from the
days of Samuel the prophet; neither did all the kings of Israel keep
such a passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and
all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. 35:19 In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah was this passover
kept. 35:20 After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Necho king
of Egypt came up to fight against Charchemish by Euphrates: and Josiah
went out against him. 35:21 But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with
thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day, but
against the house wherewith I have war: for God commanded me to make
haste: forbear thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he
destroy thee not. 35:22 Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but
disguised himself, that he might fight with him, and hearkened not
unto the words of Necho from the mouth of God, and came to fight in
the valley of Megiddo. 35:23 And the archers shot at king Josiah; and the king said to his
servants, Have me away; for I am sore wounded. 35:24 His servants therefore took him out of that chariot, and put him
in the second chariot that he had; and they brought him to Jerusalem,
and he died, and was buried in one of the sepulchres of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. 35:25 And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah: and all the singing men and
the singing women spake of Josiah in their lamentations to this day,
and made them an ordinance in Israel: and, behold, they are written in
the lamentations. 35:26 Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his goodness, according
to that which was written in the law of the LORD, 35:27 And his deeds,
first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of
Israel and Judah. 36:1 Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and
made him king in his father's stead in Jerusalem. 36:2 Jehoahaz was twenty and three years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. 36:3 And the king of Egypt put him down at Jerusalem, and condemned
the land in an hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold. 36:4 And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah
and Jerusalem, and turned his name to Jehoiakim. And Necho took
Jehoahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt. 36:5 Jehoiakim was twenty and five years old when he began to reign,
and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem: and he did that which was
evil in the sight of the LORD his God. 36:6 Against him came up Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and bound him
in fetters, to carry him to Babylon. 36:7 Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of the
LORD to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon. 36:8 Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which
he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are written in
the book of the kings of Israel and Judah: and Jehoiachin his son
reigned in his stead. 36:9 Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he
reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem: and he did that which
was evil in the sight of the LORD. 36:10 And when the year was expired, king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and
brought him to Babylon, with the goodly vessels of the house of the
LORD, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem. 36:11 Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign,
and reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. 36:12 And he did that which was evil in the sight of the LORD his God,
and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the
mouth of the LORD. 36:13 And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made
him swear by God: but he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart
from turning unto the LORD God of Israel. 36:14 Moreover all the chief of the priests, and the people,
transgressed very much after all the abominations of the heathen; and
polluted the house of the LORD which he had hallowed in Jerusalem. 36:15 And the LORD God of their fathers sent to them by his
messengers, rising up betimes, and sending; because he had compassion
on his people, and on his dwelling place: 36:16 But they mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets,
until the wrath of the LORD arose against his people, till there was
no remedy. 36:17 Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldees, who
slew their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary,
and had no compassion upon young man or maiden, old man, or him that
stooped for age: he gave them all into his hand. 36:18 And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and
the treasures of the house of the LORD, and the treasures of the king,
and of his princes; all these he brought to Babylon. 36:19 And they burnt the house of God, and brake down the wall of
Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces thereof with fire, and destroyed
all the goodly vessels thereof. 36:20 And them that had escaped from the sword carried he away to
Babylon; where they were servants to him and his sons until the reign
of the kingdom of Persia: 36:21 To fulfil the word of the LORD by the
mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed her sabbaths: for as
long as she lay desolate she kept sabbath, to fulfil threescore and
ten years. 36:22 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of
the LORD spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, the
LORD stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a
proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing,
saying, 36:23 Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the
earth hath the LORD God of heaven given me; and he hath charged me to
build him an house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Who is there among
you of all his people? The LORD his God be with him, and let him go up. Ezra


1:1 Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of
the LORD by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the LORD stirred
up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation
throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, 1:2
Thus saith Cyrus king of Persia, The LORD God of heaven hath given me
all the kingdoms of the earth; and he hath charged me to build him an
house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah. 1:3 Who is there among you of all his people? his God be with him, and
let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of
the LORD God of Israel, (he is the God,) which is in Jerusalem. 1:4 And whosoever remaineth in any place where he sojourneth, let the
men of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods,
and with beasts, beside the freewill offering for the house of God
that is in Jerusalem. 1:5 Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and
the priests, and the Levites, with all them whose spirit God had
raised, to go up to build the house of the LORD which is in Jerusalem. 1:6 And all they that were about them strengthened their hands with
vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with
precious things, beside all that was willingly offered. 1:7 Also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of the
LORD, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had
put them in the house of his gods; 1:8 Even those did Cyrus king of
Persia bring forth by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, and
numbered them unto Sheshbazzar, the prince of Judah. 1:9 And this is the number of them: thirty chargers of gold, a
thousand chargers of silver, nine and twenty knives, 1:10 Thirty
basons of gold, silver basons of a second sort four hundred and ten,
and other vessels a thousand.