She never could accept him. And it was not only that her feelings were still adverse to any man
save one; her judgement, on a serious consideration of the possibilities
of such a case was against Mr Elliot. Though they had now been acquainted a month, she could not be satisfied
that she really knew his character. That he was a sensible man,
an agreeable man, that he talked well, professed good opinions,
seemed to judge properly and as a man of principle, this was all
clear enough. He certainly knew what was right, nor could she fix
on any one article of moral duty evidently transgressed; but yet she would
have been afraid to answer for his conduct. She distrusted the past,
if not the present. The names which occasionally dropt
of former associates, the allusions to former practices and pursuits,
suggested suspicions not favourable of what he had been. She saw that there had been bad habits; that Sunday travelling
had been a common thing; that there had been a period of his life
(and probably not a short one) when he had been, at least,
careless in all serious matters; and, though he might now think
very differently, who could answer for the true sentiments of a clever,
cautious man, grown old enough to appreciate a fair character? How could it ever be ascertained that his mind was truly cleansed? Mr Elliot was rational, discreet, polished, but he was not open. There was never any burst of feeling, any warmth of indignation or delight,
at the evil or good of others. This, to Anne, was a decided imperfection. Her early impressions were incurable. She prized the frank,
the open-hearted, the eager character beyond all others. Warmth and enthusiasm did captivate her still. She felt that she could
so much more depend upon the sincerity of those who sometimes looked
or said a careless or a hasty thing, than of those whose presence of mind
never varied, whose tongue never slipped. Mr Elliot was too generally agreeable. Various as were the tempers
in her father's house, he pleased them all. He endured too well,
stood too well with every body. He had spoken to her with some
degree of openness of Mrs Clay; had appeared completely to see
what Mrs Clay was about, and to hold her in contempt; and yet
Mrs Clay found him as agreeable as any body. Lady Russell saw either less or more than her young friend,
for she saw nothing to excite distrust. She could not imagine
a man more exactly what he ought to be than Mr Elliot; nor did she
ever enjoy a sweeter feeling than the hope of seeing him receive
the hand of her beloved Anne in Kellynch church, in the course of
the following autumn. Chapter 18


It was the beginning of February; and Anne, having been a month in Bath,
was growing very eager for news from Uppercross and Lyme. She wanted to hear much more than Mary had communicated. It was three weeks since she had heard at all. She only knew
that Henrietta was at home again; and that Louisa, though considered to be
recovering fast, was still in Lyme; and she was thinking of them all
very intently one evening, when a thicker letter than usual from Mary
was delivered to her; and, to quicken the pleasure and surprise,
with Admiral and Mrs Croft's compliments. The Crofts must be in Bath! A circumstance to interest her. They were people whom her heart turned to very naturally. "What is this?" cried Sir Walter. "The Crofts have arrived in Bath? The Crofts who rent Kellynch? What have they brought you?" "A letter from Uppercross Cottage, Sir." "Oh! those letters are convenient passports. They secure an introduction. I should have visited Admiral Croft, however, at any rate. I know what is due to my tenant." Anne could listen no longer; she could not even have told how
the poor Admiral's complexion escaped; her letter engrossed her. It had been begun several days back. "February 1st. "My dear Anne,--I make no apology for my silence, because I know
how little people think of letters in such a place as Bath. You must be a great deal too happy to care for Uppercross, which,
as you well know, affords little to write about. We have had
a very dull Christmas; Mr and Mrs Musgrove have not had one dinner party
all the holidays. I do not reckon the Hayters as anybody. The holidays, however, are over at last:  I believe no children ever had
such long ones. I am sure I had not. The house was cleared yesterday,
except of the little Harvilles; but you will be surprised to hear
they have never gone home. Mrs Harville must be an odd mother
to part with them so long. I do not understand it. They are
not at all nice children, in my opinion; but Mrs Musgrove seems to
like them quite as well, if not better, than her grandchildren. What dreadful weather we have had! It may not be felt in Bath,
with your nice pavements; but in the country it is of some consequence. I have not had a creature call on me since the second week in January,
except Charles Hayter, who had been calling much oftener than was welcome. Between ourselves, I think it a great pity Henrietta did not remain at Lyme
as long as Louisa; it would have kept her a little out of his way. The carriage is gone to-day, to bring Louisa and the Harvilles to-morrow. We are not asked to dine with them, however, till the day after,
Mrs Musgrove is so afraid of her being fatigued by the journey,
which is not very likely, considering the care that will be taken of her;
and it would be much more convenient to me to dine there to-morrow. I am glad you find Mr Elliot so agreeable, and wish I could be acquainted
with him too; but I have my usual luck:  I am always out of the way
when any thing desirable is going on; always the last of my family
to be noticed. What an immense time Mrs Clay has been staying
with Elizabeth! Does she never mean to go away? But perhaps
if she were to leave the room vacant, we might not be invited. Let me know what you think of this. I do not expect my children
to be asked, you know. I can leave them at the Great House very well,
for a month or six weeks. I have this moment heard that the Crofts
are going to Bath almost immediately; they think the Admiral gouty. Charles heard it quite by chance; they have not had the civility
to give me any notice, or of offering to take anything. I do not think they improve at all as neighbours. We see nothing of them,
and this is really an instance of gross inattention. Charles joins me
in love, and everything proper. Yours affectionately,

  "Mary M---. "I am sorry to say that I am very far from well; and Jemima has
just told me that the butcher says there is a bad sore-throat
very much about. I dare say I shall catch it; and my sore-throats,
you know, are always worse than anybody's." So ended the first part, which had been afterwards put into an envelope,
containing nearly as much more. "I kept my letter open, that I might send you word how Louisa
bore her journey, and now I am extremely glad I did, having a great deal
to add. In the first place, I had a note from Mrs Croft yesterday,
offering to convey anything to you; a very kind, friendly note indeed,
addressed to me, just as it ought; I shall therefore be able to
make my letter as long as I like. The Admiral does not seem very ill,
and I sincerely hope Bath will do him all the good he wants. I shall be truly glad to have them back again. Our neighbourhood
cannot spare such a pleasant family. But now for Louisa. I have something to communicate that will astonish you not a little. She and the Harvilles came on Tuesday very safely, and in the evening
we went to ask her how she did, when we were rather surprised
not to find Captain Benwick of the party, for he had been invited
as well as the Harvilles; and what do you think was the reason? Neither more nor less than his being in love with Louisa,
and not choosing to venture to Uppercross till he had had an answer
from Mr Musgrove; for it was all settled between him and her
before she came away, and he had written to her father by Captain Harville. True, upon my honour! Are not you astonished? I shall be surprised
at least if you ever received a hint of it, for I never did. Mrs Musgrove protests solemnly that she knew nothing of the matter. We are all very well pleased, however, for though it is not equal to her
marrying Captain Wentworth, it is infinitely better than Charles Hayter;
and Mr Musgrove has written his consent, and Captain Benwick
is expected to-day. Mrs Harville says her husband feels a good deal
on his poor sister's account; but, however, Louisa is a great favourite
with both. Indeed, Mrs Harville and I quite agree that we love her
the better for having nursed her. Charles wonders what Captain Wentworth
will say; but if you remember, I never thought him attached to Louisa;
I never could see anything of it. And this is the end, you see,
of Captain Benwick's being supposed to be an admirer of yours. How Charles could take such a thing into his head was always
incomprehensible to me. I hope he will be more agreeable now. Certainly not a great match for Louisa Musgrove, but a million times better
than marrying among the Hayters." Mary need not have feared her sister's being in any degree prepared
for the news. She had never in her life been more astonished. Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove! It was almost too wonderful
for belief, and it was with the greatest effort that she could remain
in the room, preserve an air of calmness, and answer the common questions
of the moment. Happily for her, they were not many. Sir Walter
wanted to know whether the Crofts travelled with four horses,
and whether they were likely to be situated in such a part of Bath
as it might suit Miss Elliot and himself to visit in; but had
little curiosity beyond. "How is Mary?" said Elizabeth; and without waiting for an answer,
"And pray what brings the Crofts to Bath?" "They come on the Admiral's account. He is thought to be gouty." "Gout and decrepitude!" said Sir Walter. "Poor old gentleman." "Have they any acquaintance here?" asked Elizabeth. "I do not know; but I can hardly suppose that, at Admiral Croft's
time of life, and in his profession, he should not have many acquaintance
in such a place as this." "I suspect," said Sir Walter coolly, "that Admiral Croft
will be best known in Bath as the renter of Kellynch Hall. Elizabeth, may we venture to present him and his wife in Laura Place?" "Oh, no! I think not. Situated as we are with Lady Dalrymple, cousins,
we ought to be very careful not to embarrass her with acquaintance
she might not approve. If we were not related, it would not signify;
but as cousins, she would feel scrupulous as to any proposal of ours. We had better leave the Crofts to find their own level. There are several odd-looking men walking about here, who,
I am told, are sailors. The Crofts will associate with them." This was Sir Walter and Elizabeth's share of interest in the letter;
when Mrs Clay had paid her tribute of more decent attention,
in an enquiry after Mrs Charles Musgrove, and her fine little boys,
Anne was at liberty. In her own room, she tried to comprehend it. Well might Charles wonder
how Captain Wentworth would feel! Perhaps he had quitted the field,
had given Louisa up, had ceased to love, had found he did not love her. She could not endure the idea of treachery or levity, or anything
akin to ill usage between him and his friend. She could not endure
that such a friendship as theirs should be severed unfairly. Captain Benwick and Louisa Musgrove! The high-spirited,
joyous-talking Louisa Musgrove, and the dejected, thinking,
feeling, reading, Captain Benwick, seemed each of them everything
that would not suit the other. Their minds most dissimilar! Where could have been the attraction? The answer soon presented itself. It had been in situation. They had been thrown together several weeks;
they had been living in the same small family party:  since Henrietta's
coming away, they must have been depending almost entirely on each other,
and Louisa, just recovering from illness, had been in an interesting state,
and Captain Benwick was not inconsolable. That was a point which Anne
had not been able to avoid suspecting before; and instead of drawing
the same conclusion as Mary, from the present course of events,
they served only to confirm the idea of his having felt some
dawning of tenderness toward herself. She did not mean, however,
to derive much more from it to gratify her vanity, than Mary
might have allowed. She was persuaded that any tolerably pleasing
young woman who had listened and seemed to feel for him would have
received the same compliment. He had an affectionate heart. He must love somebody. She saw no reason against their being happy. Louisa had fine
naval fervour to begin with, and they would soon grow more alike. He would gain cheerfulness, and she would learn to be an enthusiast
for Scott and Lord Byron; nay, that was probably learnt already;
of course they had fallen in love over poetry. The idea of
Louisa Musgrove turned into a person of literary taste,
and sentimental reflection was amusing, but she had no doubt
of its being so. The day at Lyme, the fall from the Cobb,
might influence her health, her nerves, her courage, her character to
the end of her life, as thoroughly as it appeared to have
influenced her fate. The conclusion of the whole was, that if the woman who had been sensible
of Captain Wentworth's merits could be allowed to prefer another man,
there was nothing in the engagement to excite lasting wonder;
and if Captain Wentworth lost no friend by it, certainly nothing
to be regretted. No, it was not regret which made Anne's heart
beat in spite of herself, and brought the colour into her cheeks
when she thought of Captain Wentworth unshackled and free. She had some feelings which she was ashamed to investigate. They were too much like joy, senseless joy! She longed to see the Crofts; but when the meeting took place,
it was evident that no rumour of the news had yet reached them. The visit of ceremony was paid and returned; and Louisa Musgrove
was mentioned, and Captain Benwick, too, without even half a smile. The Crofts had placed themselves in lodgings in Gay Street,
perfectly to Sir Walter's satisfaction. He was not at all ashamed
of the acquaintance, and did, in fact, think and talk a great deal more
about the Admiral, than the Admiral ever thought or talked about him. The Crofts knew quite as many people in Bath as they wished for,
and considered their intercourse with the Elliots as a mere matter of form,
and not in the least likely to afford them any pleasure. They brought with them their country habit of being almost always together. He was ordered to walk to keep off the gout, and Mrs Croft
seemed to go shares with him in everything, and to walk
for her life to do him good. Anne saw them wherever she went. Lady Russell took her out in her carriage almost every morning,
and she never failed to think of them, and never failed to see them. Knowing their feelings as she did, it was a most attractive picture
of happiness to her. She always watched them as long as she could,
delighted to fancy she understood what they might be talking of,
as they walked along in happy independence, or equally delighted
to see the Admiral's hearty shake of the hand when he encountered
an old friend, and observe their eagerness of conversation
when occasionally forming into a little knot of the navy, Mrs Croft
looking as intelligent and keen as any of the officers around her. Anne was too much engaged with Lady Russell to be often walking herself;
but it so happened that one morning, about a week or ten days
after the Croft's arrival, it suited her best to leave her friend,
or her friend's carriage, in the lower part of the town,
and return alone to Camden Place, and in walking up Milsom Street
she had the good fortune to meet with the Admiral. He was standing
by himself at a printshop window, with his hands behind him,
in earnest contemplation of some print, and she not only might have
passed him unseen, but was obliged to touch as well as address him
before she could catch his notice. When he did perceive and
acknowledge her, however, it was done with all his usual frankness
and good humour. "Ha! is it you? Thank you, thank you. This is treating me like a friend. Here I am, you see,
staring at a picture. I can never get by this shop without stopping. But what a thing here is, by way of a boat! Do look at it. Did you ever see the like? What queer fellows your fine painters must be,
to think that anybody would venture their lives in such a shapeless
old cockleshell as that? And yet here are two gentlemen
stuck up in it mightily at their ease, and looking about them at the rocks
and mountains, as if they were not to be upset the next moment,
which they certainly must be. I wonder where that boat was built!" (laughing heartily); "I would not venture over a horsepond in it. Well," (turning away), "now, where are you bound? Can I go anywhere
for you, or with you? Can I be of any use?" "None, I thank you, unless you will give me the pleasure of your company
the little way our road lies together. I am going home." "That I will, with all my heart, and farther, too. Yes, yes
we will have a snug walk together, and I have something to tell you
as we go along. There, take my arm; that's right; I do not
feel comfortable if I have not a woman there. Lord! what a boat it is!" taking a last look at the picture, as they began to be in motion. "Did you say that you had something to tell me, sir?" "Yes, I have, presently. But here comes a friend, Captain Brigden;
I shall only say, `How d'ye do?' as we pass, however. I shall not stop. `How d'ye do?' Brigden stares to see anybody with me but my wife. She, poor soul, is tied by the leg. She has a blister on one of her heels,
as large as a three-shilling piece. If you look across the street,
you will see Admiral Brand coming down and his brother. Shabby fellows,
both of them! I am glad they are not on this side of the way. Sophy cannot bear them. They played me a pitiful trick once:
got away with some of my best men. I will tell you the whole story
another time. There comes old Sir Archibald Drew and his grandson. Look, he sees us; he kisses his hand to you; he takes you for my wife. Ah! the peace has come too soon for that younker. Poor old Sir Archibald! How do you like Bath, Miss Elliot? It suits us very well. We are always meeting with some old friend or other; the streets
full of them every morning; sure to have plenty of chat;
and then we get away from them all, and shut ourselves in our lodgings,
and draw in our chairs, and are snug as if we were at Kellynch,
ay, or as we used to be even at North Yarmouth and Deal. We do not like our lodgings here the worse, I can tell you,
for putting us in mind of those we first had at North Yarmouth. The wind blows through one of the cupboards just in the same way." When they were got a little farther, Anne ventured to press again
for what he had to communicate. She hoped when clear of Milsom Street
to have her curiosity gratified; but she was still obliged to wait,
for the Admiral had made up his mind not to begin till they had
gained the greater space and quiet of Belmont; and as she was
not really Mrs Croft, she must let him have his own way. As soon as they were fairly ascending Belmont, he began--

"Well, now you shall hear something that will surprise you. But first of all, you must tell me the name of the young lady
I am going to talk about. That young lady, you know, that we have
all been so concerned for. The Miss Musgrove, that all this has been
happening to. Her Christian name:  I always forget her Christian name." Anne had been ashamed to appear to comprehend so soon as she really
did; but now she could safely suggest the name of "Louisa." "Ay, ay, Miss Louisa Musgrove, that is the name. I wish young ladies
had not such a number of fine Christian names. I should never be out
if they were all Sophys, or something of that sort. Well,
this Miss Louisa, we all thought, you know, was to marry Frederick. He was courting her week after week. The only wonder was,
what they could be waiting for, till the business at Lyme came;
then, indeed, it was clear enough that they must wait till her brain
was set to right. But even then there was something odd in their
way of going on. Instead of staying at Lyme, he went off to Plymouth,
and then he went off to see Edward. When we came back from Minehead
he was gone down to Edward's, and there he has been ever since. We have seen nothing of him since November. Even Sophy could
not understand it. But now, the matter has take the strangest turn of all;
for this young lady, the same Miss Musgrove, instead of being
to marry Frederick, is to marry James Benwick. You know James Benwick." "A little. I am a little acquainted with Captain Benwick." "Well, she is to marry him. Nay, most likely they are married already,
for I do not know what they should wait for." "I thought Captain Benwick a very pleasing young man," said Anne,
"and I understand that he bears an excellent character." "Oh! yes, yes, there is not a word to be said against James Benwick. He is only a commander, it is true, made last summer, and these are
bad times for getting on, but he has not another fault that I know of. An excellent, good-hearted fellow, I assure you; a very active,
zealous officer too, which is more than you would think for, perhaps,
for that soft sort of manner does not do him justice." "Indeed you are mistaken there, sir; I should never augur want of spirit
from Captain Benwick's manners. I thought them particularly pleasing,
and I will answer for it, they would generally please." "Well, well, ladies are the best judges; but James Benwick is rather too
piano for me; and though very likely it is all our partiality,
Sophy and I cannot help thinking Frederick's manners better than his. There is something about Frederick more to our taste." Anne was caught. She had only meant to oppose the too common idea
of spirit and gentleness being incompatible with each other,
not at all to represent Captain Benwick's manners as the very best
that could possibly be; and, after a little hesitation,
she was beginning to say, "I was not entering into any comparison
of the two friends," but the Admiral interrupted her with--

"And the thing is certainly true. It is not a mere bit of gossip. We have it from Frederick himself. His sister had a letter
from him yesterday, in which he tells us of it, and he had just had it
in a letter from Harville, written upon the spot, from Uppercross. I fancy they are all at Uppercross." This was an opportunity which Anne could not resist; she said, therefore,
"I hope, Admiral, I hope there is nothing in the style of Captain
Wentworth's letter to make you and Mrs Croft particularly uneasy. It did seem, last autumn, as if there were an attachment between him
and Louisa Musgrove; but I hope it may be understood to have worn out
on each side equally, and without violence. I hope his letter
does not breathe the spirit of an ill-used man." "Not at all, not at all; there is not an oath or a murmur
from beginning to end." Anne looked down to hide her smile. "No, no; Frederick is not a man to whine and complain; he has
too much spirit for that. If the girl likes another man better,
it is very fit she should have him." "Certainly. But what I mean is, that I hope there is nothing
in Captain Wentworth's manner of writing to make you suppose
he thinks himself ill-used by his friend, which might appear,
you know, without its being absolutely said. I should be very sorry
that such a friendship as has subsisted between him and Captain Benwick
should be destroyed, or even wounded, by a circumstance of this sort." "Yes, yes, I understand you. But there is nothing at all of that nature
in the letter. He does not give the least fling at Benwick;
does not so much as say, `I wonder at it, I have a reason of my own
for wondering at it.' No, you would not guess, from his way of writing,
that he had ever thought of this Miss (what's her name?) for himself. He very handsomely hopes they will be happy together; and there is
nothing very unforgiving in that, I think." Anne did not receive the perfect conviction which the Admiral meant
to convey, but it would have been useless to press the enquiry farther. She therefore satisfied herself with common-place remarks or quiet
attention, and the Admiral had it all his own way. "Poor Frederick!" said he at last. "Now he must begin all over again
with somebody else. I think we must get him to Bath. Sophy must write,
and beg him to come to Bath. Here are pretty girls enough, I am sure. It would be of no use to go to Uppercross again, for that other
Miss Musgrove, I find, is bespoke by her cousin, the young parson. Do not you think, Miss Elliot, we had better try to get him to Bath?" Chapter 19


While Admiral Croft was taking this walk with Anne, and expressing
his wish of getting Captain Wentworth to Bath, Captain Wentworth
was already on his way thither. Before Mrs Croft had written,
he was arrived, and the very next time Anne walked out, she saw him. Mr Elliot was attending his two cousins and Mrs Clay. They were
in Milsom Street. It began to rain, not much, but enough to
make shelter desirable for women, and quite enough to make it
very desirable for Miss Elliot to have the advantage of being
conveyed home in Lady Dalrymple's carriage, which was seen waiting
at a little distance; she, Anne, and Mrs Clay, therefore,
turned into Molland's, while Mr Elliot stepped to Lady Dalrymple,
to request her assistance. He soon joined them again, successful,
of course; Lady Dalrymple would be most happy to take them home,
and would call for them in a few minutes. Her ladyship's carriage was a barouche, and did not hold
more than four with any comfort. Miss Carteret was with her mother;
consequently it was not reasonable to expect accommodation
for all the three Camden Place ladies. There could be no doubt
as to Miss Elliot. Whoever suffered inconvenience, she must suffer none,
but it occupied a little time to settle the point of civility
between the other two. The rain was a mere trifle, and Anne was
most sincere in preferring a walk with Mr Elliot. But the rain was also
a mere trifle to Mrs Clay; she would hardly allow it even to drop at all,
and her boots were so thick! much thicker than Miss Anne's;
and, in short, her civility rendered her quite as anxious to be left
to walk with Mr Elliot as Anne could be, and it was discussed between them
with a generosity so polite and so determined, that the others were
obliged to settle it for them; Miss Elliot maintaining that Mrs Clay
had a little cold already, and Mr Elliot deciding on appeal,
that his cousin Anne's boots were rather the thickest. It was fixed accordingly, that Mrs Clay should be of the party
in the carriage; and they had just reached this point, when Anne,
as she sat near the window, descried, most decidedly and distinctly,
Captain Wentworth walking down the street. Her start was perceptible only to herself; but she instantly felt that
she was the greatest simpleton in the world, the most unaccountable
and absurd! For a few minutes she saw nothing before her;
it was all confusion. She was lost, and when she had scolded
back her senses, she found the others still waiting for the carriage,
and Mr Elliot (always obliging) just setting off for Union Street
on a commission of Mrs Clay's. She now felt a great inclination to go to the outer door;
she wanted to see if it rained. Why was she to suspect herself
of another motive? Captain Wentworth must be out of sight. She left her seat, she would go; one half of her should not be always
so much wiser than the other half, or always suspecting the other
of being worse than it was. She would see if it rained. She was sent back, however, in a moment by the entrance of
Captain Wentworth himself, among a party of gentlemen and ladies,
evidently his acquaintance, and whom he must have joined
a little below Milsom Street. He was more obviously struck
and confused by the sight of her than she had ever observed before;
he looked quite red. For the first time, since their renewed acquaintance,
she felt that she was betraying the least sensibility of the two. She had the advantage of him in the preparation of the last few moments. All the overpowering, blinding, bewildering, first effects
of strong surprise were over with her. Still, however,
she had enough to feel! It was agitation, pain, pleasure,
a something between delight and misery. He spoke to her, and then turned away. The character of his manner
was embarrassment. She could not have called it either cold or friendly,
or anything so certainly as embarrassed. After a short interval, however, he came towards her, and spoke again. Mutual enquiries on common subjects passed:  neither of them, probably,
much the wiser for what they heard, and Anne continuing fully sensible
of his being less at ease than formerly. They had by dint of being
so very much together, got to speak to each other with a considerable
portion of apparent indifference and calmness; but he could not do it now. Time had changed him, or Louisa had changed him. There was consciousness
of some sort or other. He looked very well, not as if he had been
suffering in health or spirits, and he talked of Uppercross,
of the Musgroves, nay, even of Louisa, and had even a momentary look
of his own arch significance as he named her; but yet it was
Captain Wentworth not comfortable, not easy, not able to feign that he was. It did not surprise, but it grieved Anne to observe that Elizabeth
would not know him. She saw that he saw Elizabeth, that Elizabeth saw him,
that there was complete internal recognition on each side;
she was convinced that he was ready to be acknowledged as an acquaintance,
expecting it, and she had the pain of seeing her sister turn away
with unalterable coldness. Lady Dalrymple's carriage, for which Miss Elliot was growing
very impatient, now drew up; the servant came in to announce it. It was beginning to rain again, and altogether there was a delay,
and a bustle, and a talking, which must make all the little crowd
in the shop understand that Lady Dalrymple was calling to convey
Miss Elliot. At last Miss Elliot and her friend, unattended but
by the servant, (for there was no cousin returned), were walking off;
and Captain Wentworth, watching them, turned again to Anne,
and by manner, rather than words, was offering his services to her. "I am much obliged to you," was her answer, "but I am not going with them. The carriage would not accommodate so many. I walk:  I prefer walking." "But it rains." "Oh! very little,  Nothing that I regard." After a moment's pause he said:  "Though I came only yesterday,
I have equipped myself properly for Bath already, you see,"
(pointing to a new umbrella); "I wish you would make use of it,
if you are determined to walk; though I think it would be more prudent
to let me get you a chair." She was very much obliged to him, but declined it all, repeating
her conviction, that the rain would come to nothing at present,
and adding, "I am only waiting for Mr Elliot. He will be here in a moment,
I am sure." She had hardly spoken the words when Mr Elliot walked in. Captain Wentworth recollected him perfectly. There was no difference
between him and the man who had stood on the steps at Lyme,
admiring Anne as she passed, except in the air and look and manner
of the privileged relation and friend. He came in with eagerness,
appeared to see and think only of her, apologised for his stay,
was grieved to have kept her waiting, and anxious to get her away
without further loss of time and before the rain increased;
and in another moment they walked off together, her arm under his,
a gentle and embarrassed glance, and a "Good morning to you!" being all that she had time for, as she passed away. As soon as they were out of sight, the ladies of Captain Wentworth's party
began talking of them. "Mr Elliot does not dislike his cousin, I fancy?" "Oh! no, that is clear enough. One can guess what will happen there. He is always with them; half lives in the family, I believe. What a very good-looking man!" "Yes, and Miss Atkinson, who dined with him once at the Wallises,
says he is the most agreeable man she ever was in company with." "She is pretty, I think; Anne Elliot; very pretty, when one comes
to look at her. It is not the fashion to say so, but I confess
I admire her more than her sister." "Oh! so do I." "And so do I. No comparison. But the men are all wild after Miss Elliot. Anne is too delicate for them." Anne would have been particularly obliged to her cousin, if he would have
walked by her side all the way to Camden Place, without saying a word. She had never found it so difficult to listen to him, though nothing
could exceed his solicitude and care, and though his subjects
were principally such as were wont to be always interesting:
praise, warm, just, and discriminating, of Lady Russell,
and insinuations highly rational against Mrs Clay. But just now
she could think only of Captain Wentworth. She could not understand
his present feelings, whether he were really suffering much
from disappointment or not; and till that point were settled,
she could not be quite herself. She hoped to be wise and reasonable in time; but alas! alas! she must confess to herself that she was not wise yet. Another circumstance very essential for her to know, was how long
he meant to be in Bath; he had not mentioned it, or she could not
recollect it. He might be only passing through. But it was more probable
that he should be come to stay. In that case, so liable as every body was
to meet every body in Bath, Lady Russell would in all likelihood
see him somewhere. Would she recollect him? How would it all be? She had already been obliged to tell Lady Russell that Louisa Musgrove
was to marry Captain Benwick. It had cost her something to encounter
Lady Russell's surprise; and now, if she were by any chance
to be thrown into company with Captain Wentworth, her imperfect knowledge
of the matter might add another shade of prejudice against him. The following morning Anne was out with her friend, and for the first hour,
in an incessant and fearful sort of watch for him in vain; but at last,
in returning down Pulteney Street, she distinguished him
on the right hand pavement at such a distance as to have him in view
the greater part of the street. There were many other men about him,
many groups walking the same way, but there was no mistaking him. She looked instinctively at Lady Russell; but not from any mad idea
of her recognising him so soon as she did herself. No, it was
not to be supposed that Lady Russell would perceive him till they
were nearly opposite. She looked at her however, from time to time,
anxiously; and when the moment approached which must point him out,
though not daring to look again (for her own countenance she knew
was unfit to be seen), she was yet perfectly conscious of
Lady Russell's eyes being turned exactly in the direction for him--
of her being, in short, intently observing him. She could thoroughly
comprehend the sort of fascination he must possess over Lady Russell's mind,
the difficulty it must be for her to withdraw her eyes, the astonishment
she must be feeling that eight or nine years should have passed over him,
and in foreign climes and in active service too, without robbing him
of one personal grace! At last, Lady Russell drew back her head. "Now, how would she
speak of him?" "You will wonder," said she, "what has been fixing my eye so long;
but I was looking after some window-curtains, which Lady Alicia and
Mrs Frankland were telling me of last night. They described
the drawing-room window-curtains of one of the houses on this
side of the way, and this part of the street, as being the handsomest
and best hung of any in Bath, but could not recollect the exact number,
and I have been trying to find out which it could be; but I confess
I can see no curtains hereabouts that answer their description." Anne sighed and blushed and smiled, in pity and disdain,
either at her friend or herself. The part which provoked her most,
was that in all this waste of foresight and caution, she should have
lost the right moment for seeing whether he saw them. A day or two passed without producing anything. The theatre or the rooms,
where he was most likely to be, were not fashionable enough
for the Elliots, whose evening amusements were solely in the
elegant stupidity of private parties, in which they were getting
more and more engaged; and Anne, wearied of such a state of stagnation,
sick of knowing nothing, and fancying herself stronger because
her strength was not tried, was quite impatient for the concert evening. It was a concert for the benefit of a person patronised by Lady Dalrymple. Of course they must attend. It was really expected to be a good one,
and Captain Wentworth was very fond of music. If she could only have
a few minutes conversation with him again, she fancied she should
be satisfied; and as to the power of addressing him, she felt all over
courage if the opportunity occurred. Elizabeth had turned from him,
Lady Russell overlooked him; her nerves were strengthened
by these circumstances; she felt that she owed him attention. She had once partly promised Mrs Smith to spend the evening with her;
but in a short hurried call she excused herself and put it off,
with the more decided promise of a longer visit on the morrow. Mrs Smith gave a most good-humoured acquiescence. "By all means," said she; "only tell me all about it, when you do come. Who is your party?" Anne named them all. Mrs Smith made no reply; but when she was
leaving her said, and with an expression half serious, half arch,
"Well, I heartily wish your concert may answer; and do not fail me
to-morrow if you can come; for I begin to have a foreboding
that I may not have many more visits from you." Anne was startled and confused; but after standing in a moment's suspense,
was obliged, and not sorry to be obliged, to hurry away. Chapter 20


Sir Walter, his two daughters, and Mrs Clay, were the earliest
of all their party at the rooms in the evening; and as Lady Dalrymple
must be waited for, they took their station by one of the fires
in the Octagon Room. But hardly were they so settled, when the door
opened again, and Captain Wentworth walked in alone. Anne was
the nearest to him, and making yet a little advance, she instantly spoke. He was preparing only to bow and pass on, but her gentle "How do you do?" brought him out of the straight line to stand near her, and make enquiries
in return, in spite of the formidable father and sister in the back ground. Their being in the back ground was a support to Anne; she knew nothing
of their looks, and felt equal to everything which she believed
right to be done. While they were speaking, a whispering between her father and Elizabeth
caught her ear. She could not distinguish, but she must guess the subject;
and on Captain Wentworth's making a distant bow, she comprehended
that her father had judged so well as to give him that
simple acknowledgement of acquaintance, and she was just in time
by a side glance to see a slight curtsey from Elizabeth herself. This, though late, and reluctant, and ungracious, was yet
better than nothing, and her spirits improved. After talking, however, of the weather, and Bath, and the concert,
their conversation began to flag, and so little was said at last,
that she was expecting him to go every moment, but he did not;
he seemed in no hurry to leave her; and presently with renewed spirit,
with a little smile, a little glow, he said--

"I have hardly seen you since our day at Lyme. I am afraid you must have
suffered from the shock, and the more from its not overpowering you
at the time." She assured him that she had not. "It was a frightful hour," said he, "a frightful day!" and he
passed his hand across his eyes, as if the remembrance were still
too painful, but in a moment, half smiling again, added,
"The day has produced some effects however; has had some consequences
which must be considered as the very reverse of frightful. When you had the presence of mind to suggest that Benwick would be
the properest person to fetch a surgeon, you could have little idea
of his being eventually one of those most concerned in her recovery." "Certainly I could have none. But it appears--I should hope it would be
a very happy match. There are on both sides good principles
and good temper." "Yes," said he, looking not exactly forward; "but there, I think,
ends the resemblance. With all my soul I wish them happy, and rejoice
over every circumstance in favour of it. They have no difficulties
to contend with at home, no opposition, no caprice, no delays. The Musgroves are behaving like themselves, most honourably and kindly,
only anxious with true parental hearts to promote their daughter's comfort. All this is much, very much in favour of their happiness;
more than perhaps--"

He stopped. A sudden recollection seemed to occur, and to give him
some taste of that emotion which was reddening Anne's cheeks
and fixing her eyes on the ground. After clearing his throat, however,
he proceeded thus--

"I confess that I do think there is a disparity, too great a disparity,
and in a point no less essential than mind. I regard Louisa Musgrove
as a very amiable, sweet-tempered girl, and not deficient in understanding,
but Benwick is something more. He is a clever man, a reading man;
and I confess, that I do consider his attaching himself to her
with some surprise. Had it been the effect of gratitude,
had he learnt to love her, because he believed her to be preferring him,
it would have been another thing. But I have no reason to suppose it so. It seems, on the contrary, to have been a perfectly spontaneous,
untaught feeling on his side, and this surprises me. A man like him,
in his situation! with a heart pierced, wounded, almost broken! Fanny Harville was a very superior creature, and his attachment to her
was indeed attachment. A man does not recover from such
a devotion of the heart to such a woman. He ought not; he does not." Either from the consciousness, however, that his friend had recovered,
or from other consciousness, he went no farther; and Anne who,
in spite of the agitated voice in which the latter part had been uttered,
and in spite of all the various noises of the room, the almost ceaseless
slam of the door, and ceaseless buzz of persons walking through,
had distinguished every word, was struck, gratified, confused,
and beginning to breathe very quick, and feel an hundred things
in a moment. It was impossible for her to enter on such a subject;
and yet, after a pause, feeling the necessity of speaking,
and having not the smallest wish for a total change, she only deviated
so far as to say--

"You were a good while at Lyme, I think?" "About a fortnight. I could not leave it till Louisa's doing well
was quite ascertained. I had been too deeply concerned in the mischief
to be soon at peace. It had been my doing, solely mine. She would not have been obstinate if I had not been weak. The country round Lyme is very fine. I walked and rode a great deal;
and the more I saw, the more I found to admire." "I should very much like to see Lyme again," said Anne. "Indeed! I should not have supposed that you could have found
anything in Lyme to inspire such a feeling. The horror and distress
you were involved in, the stretch of mind, the wear of spirits! I should have thought your last impressions of Lyme must have been
strong disgust." "The last hours were certainly very painful," replied Anne;
"but when pain is over, the remembrance of it often becomes a pleasure. One does not love a place the less for having suffered in it,
unless it has been all suffering, nothing but suffering, which was
by no means the case at Lyme. We were only in anxiety and distress
during the last two hours, and previously there had been a great deal
of enjoyment. So much novelty and beauty! I have travelled so little,
that every fresh place would be interesting to me; but there is real beauty
at Lyme; and in short" (with a faint blush at some recollections),
"altogether my impressions of the place are very agreeable." As she ceased, the entrance door opened again, and the very party appeared
for whom they were waiting. "Lady Dalrymple, Lady Dalrymple,"
was the rejoicing sound; and with all the eagerness compatible
with anxious elegance, Sir Walter and his two ladies stepped forward
to meet her. Lady Dalrymple and Miss Carteret, escorted by Mr Elliot
and Colonel Wallis, who had happened to arrive nearly at the same instant,
advanced into the room. The others joined them, and it was
a group in which Anne found herself also necessarily included. She was divided from Captain Wentworth. Their interesting,
almost too interesting conversation must be broken up for a time,
but slight was the penance compared with the happiness which brought it on! She had learnt, in the last ten minutes, more of his feelings
towards Louisa, more of all his feelings than she dared to think of;
and she gave herself up to the demands of the party, to the needful
civilities of the moment, with exquisite, though agitated sensations. She was in good humour with all. She had received ideas which
disposed her to be courteous and kind to all, and to pity every one,
as being less happy than herself. The delightful emotions were a little subdued, when on stepping back
from the group, to be joined again by Captain Wentworth, she saw
that he was gone. She was just in time to see him turn into
the Concert Room. He was gone; he had disappeared, she felt
a moment's regret. But "they should meet again. He would look for her,
he would find her out before the evening were over, and at present,
perhaps, it was as well to be asunder. She was in need of
a little interval for recollection." Upon Lady Russell's appearance soon afterwards, the whole party
was collected, and all that remained was to marshal themselves,
and proceed into the Concert Room; and be of all the consequence
in their power, draw as many eyes, excite as many whispers,
and disturb as many people as they could. Very, very happy were both Elizabeth and Anne Elliot as they walked in. Elizabeth arm in arm with Miss Carteret, and looking on the broad back
of the dowager Viscountess Dalrymple before her, had nothing to wish for
which did not seem within her reach; and Anne--but it would be
an insult to the nature of Anne's felicity, to draw any comparison
between it and her sister's; the origin of one all selfish vanity,
of the other all generous attachment. Anne saw nothing, thought nothing of the brilliancy of the room. Her happiness was from within. Her eyes were bright and her cheeks glowed;
but she knew nothing about it. She was thinking only of
the last half hour, and as they passed to their seats, her mind took
a hasty range over it. His choice of subjects, his expressions,
and still more his manner and look, had been such as she could see
in only one light. His opinion of Louisa Musgrove's inferiority,
an opinion which he had seemed solicitous to give, his wonder
at Captain Benwick, his feelings as to a first, strong attachment;
sentences begun which he could not finish, his half averted eyes
and more than half expressive glance, all, all declared that he had
a heart returning to her at least; that anger, resentment, avoidance,
were no more; and that they were succeeded, not merely by friendship
and regard, but by the tenderness of the past. Yes, some share of
the tenderness of the past. She could not contemplate the change
as implying less. He must love her. These were thoughts, with their attendant visions, which occupied
and flurried her too much to leave her any power of observation;
and she passed along the room without having a glimpse of him,
without even trying to discern him. When their places were determined on,
and they were all properly arranged, she looked round to see
if he should happen to be in the same part of the room, but he was not;
her eye could not reach him; and the concert being just opening,
she must consent for a time to be happy in a humbler way. The party was divided and disposed of on two contiguous benches:
Anne was among those on the foremost, and Mr Elliot had manoeuvred so well,
with the assistance of his friend Colonel Wallis, as to have a seat by her. Miss Elliot, surrounded by her cousins, and the principal object
of Colonel Wallis's gallantry, was quite contented. Anne's mind was in a most favourable state for the entertainment
of the evening; it was just occupation enough:  she had feelings for
the tender, spirits for the gay, attention for the scientific,
and patience for the wearisome; and had never liked a concert better,
at least during the first act. Towards the close of it,
in the interval succeeding an Italian song, she explained
the words of the song to Mr Elliot. They had a concert bill between them. "This," said she, "is nearly the sense, or rather the meaning of the words,
for certainly the sense of an Italian love-song must not be talked of,
but it is as nearly the meaning as I can give; for I do not pretend
to understand the language. I am a very poor Italian scholar." "Yes, yes, I see you are. I see you know nothing of the matter. You have only knowledge enough of the language to translate at sight
these inverted, transposed, curtailed Italian lines, into clear,
comprehensible, elegant English. You need not say anything more
of your ignorance. Here is complete proof." "I will not oppose such kind politeness; but I should be sorry to be
examined by a real proficient." "I have not had the pleasure of visiting in Camden Place so long,"
replied he, "without knowing something of Miss Anne Elliot;
and I do regard her as one who is too modest for the world in general
to be aware of half her accomplishments, and too highly accomplished
for modesty to be natural in any other woman." "For shame! for shame! this is too much flattery. I forget what we are
to have next," turning to the bill. "Perhaps," said Mr Elliot, speaking low, "I have had a longer acquaintance
with your character than you are aware of." "Indeed! How so? You can have been acquainted with it only since
I came to Bath, excepting as you might hear me previously spoken of
in my own family." "I knew you by report long before you came to Bath. I had heard you
described by those who knew you intimately. I have been acquainted
with you by character many years. Your person, your disposition,
accomplishments, manner; they were all present to me." Mr Elliot was not disappointed in the interest he hoped to raise. No one can withstand the charm of such a mystery. To have been
described long ago to a recent acquaintance, by nameless people,
is irresistible; and Anne was all curiosity. She wondered,
and questioned him eagerly; but in vain. He delighted in being asked,
but he would not tell. "No, no, some time or other, perhaps, but not now. He would mention
no names now; but such, he could assure her, had been the fact. He had many years ago received such a description of Miss Anne Elliot
as had inspired him with the highest idea of her merit, and excited
the warmest curiosity to know her." Anne could think of no one so likely to have spoken with
partiality of her many years ago as the Mr Wentworth of Monkford,
Captain Wentworth's brother. He might have been in Mr Elliot's company,
but she had not courage to ask the question. "The name of Anne Elliot," said he, "has long had an interesting sound to me. Very long has it possessed a charm over my fancy; and, if I dared,
I would breathe my wishes that the name might never change." Such, she believed, were his words; but scarcely had she
received their sound, than her attention was caught by other sounds
immediately behind her, which rendered every thing else trivial. Her father and Lady Dalrymple were speaking. "A well-looking man," said Sir Walter, "a very well-looking man." "A very fine young man indeed!" said Lady Dalrymple. "More air
than one often sees in Bath. Irish, I dare say." "No, I just know his name. A bowing acquaintance. Wentworth;
Captain Wentworth of the navy. His sister married my tenant
in Somersetshire, the Croft, who rents Kellynch." Before Sir Walter had reached this point, Anne's eyes had caught
the right direction, and distinguished Captain Wentworth standing
among a cluster of men at a little distance. As her eyes fell on him,
his seemed to be withdrawn from her. It had that appearance. It seemed as if she had been one moment too late; and as long as she
dared observe, he did not look again:  but the performance
was recommencing, and she was forced to seem to restore her attention
to the orchestra and look straight forward. When she could give another glance, he had moved away. He could not have
come nearer to her if he would; she was so surrounded and shut in:
but she would rather have caught his eye. Mr Elliot's speech, too, distressed her. She had no longer
any inclination to talk to him. She wished him not so near her. The first act was over. Now she hoped for some beneficial change;
and, after a period of nothing-saying amongst the party, some of them
did decide on going in quest of tea. Anne was one of the few who
did not choose to move. She remained in her seat, and so did Lady Russell;
but she had the pleasure of getting rid of Mr Elliot; and she did not mean,
whatever she might feel on Lady Russell's account, to shrink from
conversation with Captain Wentworth, if he gave her the opportunity. She was persuaded by Lady Russell's countenance that she had seen him. He did not come however. Anne sometimes fancied she discerned him
at a distance, but he never came. The anxious interval
wore away unproductively. The others returned, the room filled again,
benches were reclaimed and repossessed, and another hour of pleasure
or of penance was to be sat out, another hour of music was to give
delight or the gapes, as real or affected taste for it prevailed. To Anne, it chiefly wore the prospect of an hour of agitation. She could not quit that room in peace without seeing Captain Wentworth
once more, without the interchange of one friendly look. In re-settling themselves there were now many changes, the result of which
was favourable for her. Colonel Wallis declined sitting down again,
and Mr Elliot was invited by Elizabeth and Miss Carteret, in a manner
not to be refused, to sit between them; and by some other removals,
and a little scheming of her own,  Anne was enabled to place herself
much nearer the end of the bench than she had been before,
much more within reach of a passer-by. She could not do so,
without comparing herself with Miss Larolles, the inimitable Miss Larolles;
but still she did it, and not with much happier effect;
though by what seemed prosperity in the shape of an early abdication
in her next neighbours, she found herself at the very end of the bench
before the concert closed. Such was her situation, with a vacant space at hand, when Captain Wentworth
was again in sight. She saw him not far off. He saw her too;
yet he looked grave, and seemed irresolute, and only by very slow degrees
came at last near enough to speak to her. She felt that something
must be the matter. The change was indubitable. The difference
between his present air and what it had been in the Octagon Room
was strikingly great. Why was it? She thought of her father,
of Lady Russell. Could there have been any unpleasant glances? He began by speaking of the concert gravely, more like the Captain
Wentworth of Uppercross; owned himself disappointed, had expected singing;
and in short, must confess that he should not be sorry when it was over. Anne replied, and spoke in defence of the performance so well,
and yet in allowance for his feelings so pleasantly, that his countenance
improved, and he replied again with almost a smile. They talked
for a few minutes more; the improvement held; he even looked down
towards the bench, as if he saw a place on it well worth occupying;
when at that moment a touch on her shoulder obliged Anne to turn round. It came from Mr Elliot. He begged her pardon, but she must be applied to,
to explain Italian again. Miss Carteret was very anxious to have
a general idea of what was next to be sung. Anne could not refuse;
but never had she sacrificed to politeness with a more suffering spirit. A few minutes, though as few as possible, were inevitably consumed;
and when her own mistress again, when able to turn and look
as she had done before, she found herself accosted by Captain Wentworth,
in a reserved yet hurried sort of farewell. "He must wish her good night;
he was going; he should get home as fast as he could." "Is not this song worth staying for?" said Anne, suddenly struck
by an idea which made her yet more anxious to be encouraging. "No!" he replied impressively, "there is nothing worth my staying for;"
and he was gone directly. Jealousy of Mr Elliot! It was the only intelligible motive. Captain Wentworth jealous of her affection! Could she have believed it
a week ago; three hours ago! For a moment the gratification was exquisite. But, alas! there were very different thoughts to succeed. How was such jealousy to be quieted? How was the truth to reach him? How, in all the peculiar disadvantages of their respective situations,
would he ever learn of her real sentiments? It was misery to think
of Mr Elliot's attentions. Their evil was incalculable. Chapter 21


Anne recollected with pleasure the next morning her promise
of going to Mrs Smith, meaning that it should engage her from home
at the time when Mr Elliot would be most likely to call; for to avoid
Mr Elliot was almost a first object. She felt a great deal of good-will towards him. In spite of
the mischief of his attentions, she owed him gratitude and regard,
perhaps compassion. She could not help thinking much of the extraordinary
circumstances attending their acquaintance, of the right which
he seemed to have to interest her, by everything in situation,
by his own sentiments, by his early prepossession. It was altogether
very extraordinary; flattering, but painful. There was much to regret. How she might have felt had there been no Captain Wentworth in the case,
was not worth enquiry; for there was a Captain Wentworth;
and be the conclusion of the present suspense good or bad,
her affection would be his for ever. Their union, she believed,
could not divide her more from other men, than their final separation. Prettier musings of high-wrought love and eternal constancy,
could never have passed along the streets of Bath, than Anne
was sporting with from Camden Place to Westgate Buildings. It was almost enough to spread purification and perfume all the way. She was sure of a pleasant reception; and her friend seemed this morning
particularly obliged to her for coming, seemed hardly to have expected her,
though it had been an appointment. An account of the concert was immediately claimed; and Anne's recollections
of the concert were quite happy enough to animate her features
and make her rejoice to talk of it. All that she could tell
she told most gladly, but the all was little for one who had been there,
and unsatisfactory for such an enquirer as Mrs Smith, who had
already heard, through the short cut of a laundress and a waiter,
rather more of the general success and produce of the evening
than Anne could relate, and who now asked in vain for several particulars
of the company. Everybody of any consequence or notoriety in Bath
was well know by name to Mrs Smith. "The little Durands were there, I conclude," said she, "with their mouths
open to catch the music, like unfledged sparrows ready to be fed. They never miss a concert." "Yes; I did not see them myself, but I heard Mr Elliot say they were
in the room." "The Ibbotsons, were they there? and the two new beauties,
with the tall Irish officer, who is talked of for one of them." "I do not know. I do not think they were." "Old Lady Mary Maclean? I need not ask after her. She never misses,
I know; and you must have seen her. She must have been in your own circle;
for as you went with Lady Dalrymple, you were in the seats of grandeur,
round the orchestra, of course." "No, that was what I dreaded. It would have been very unpleasant to me
in every respect. But happily Lady Dalrymple always chooses
to be farther off; and we were exceedingly well placed, that is,
for hearing; I must not say for seeing, because I appear to have seen
very little." "Oh! you saw enough for your own amusement. I can understand. There is a sort of domestic enjoyment to be known even in a crowd,
and this you had. You were a large party in yourselves,
and you wanted nothing beyond." "But I ought to have looked about me more," said Anne, conscious
while she spoke that there had in fact been no want of looking about,
that the object only had been deficient. "No, no; you were better employed. You need not tell me that you
had a pleasant evening. I see it in your eye. I perfectly see
how the hours passed:  that you had always something agreeable
to listen to. In the intervals of the concert it was conversation." Anne half smiled and said, "Do you see that in my eye?" "Yes, I do. Your countenance perfectly informs me that you were
in company last night with the person whom you think the most agreeable
in the world, the person who interests you at this present time
more than all the rest of the world put together." A blush overspread Anne's cheeks. She could say nothing. "And such being the case," continued Mrs Smith, after a short pause,
"I hope you believe that I do know how to value your kindness
in coming to me this morning. It is really very good of you
to come and sit with me, when you must have so many pleasanter demands
upon your time." Anne heard nothing of this. She was still in the astonishment and
confusion excited by her friend's penetration, unable to imagine
how any report of Captain Wentworth could have reached her. After another short silence--

"Pray," said Mrs Smith, "is Mr Elliot aware of your acquaintance with me? Does he know that I am in Bath?" "Mr Elliot!" repeated Anne, looking up surprised. A moment's reflection
shewed her the mistake she had been under. She caught it instantaneously;
and recovering her courage with the feeling of safety, soon added,
more composedly, "Are you acquainted with Mr Elliot?" "I have been a good deal acquainted with him," replied Mrs Smith, gravely,
"but it seems worn out now. It is a great while since we met." "I was not at all aware of this. You never mentioned it before. Had I known it, I would have had the pleasure of talking to him about you." "To confess the truth," said Mrs Smith, assuming her usual
air of cheerfulness, "that is exactly the pleasure I want you to have. I want you to talk about me to Mr Elliot. I want your interest with him. He can be of essential service to me; and if you would have the goodness,
my dear Miss Elliot, to make it an object to yourself,
of course it is done." "I should be extremely happy; I hope you cannot doubt my willingness
to be of even the slightest use to you," replied Anne; "but I suspect
that you are considering me as having a higher claim on Mr Elliot,
a greater right to influence him, than is really the case. I am sure you have, somehow or other, imbibed such a notion. You must consider me only as Mr Elliot's relation. If in that light
there is anything which you suppose his cousin might fairly ask of him,
I beg you would not hesitate to employ me." Mrs Smith gave her a penetrating glance, and then, smiling, said--

"I have been a little premature, I perceive; I beg your pardon. I ought to have waited for official information,  But now, my dear
Miss Elliot, as an old friend, do give me a hint as to when I may speak. Next week? To be sure by next week I may be allowed to
think it all settled, and build my own selfish schemes on
Mr Elliot's good fortune." "No," replied Anne, "nor next week, nor next, nor next. I assure you that nothing of the sort you are thinking of
will be settled any week. I am not going to marry Mr Elliot. I should like to know why you imagine I am?" Mrs Smith looked at her again, looked earnestly, smiled,
shook her head, and exclaimed--

"Now, how I do wish I understood you! How I do wish I knew
what you were at! I have a great idea that you do not design to be cruel,
when the right moment occurs. Till it does come, you know,
we women never mean to have anybody. It is a thing of course among us,
that every man is refused, till he offers. But why should you be cruel? Let me plead for my--present friend I cannot call him, but for
my former friend. Where can you look for a more suitable match? Where could you expect a more gentlemanlike, agreeable man? Let me recommend Mr Elliot. I am sure you hear nothing but good of him
from Colonel Wallis; and who can know him better than Colonel Wallis?" "My dear Mrs Smith, Mr Elliot's wife has not been dead much above
half a year. He ought not to be supposed to be paying his addresses
to any one." "Oh! if these are your only objections," cried Mrs Smith, archly,
"Mr Elliot is safe, and I shall give myself no more trouble about him. Do not forget me when you are married, that's all. Let him know me to be
a friend of yours, and then he will think little of the trouble required,
which it is very natural for him now, with so many affairs and engagements
of his own, to avoid and get rid of as he can; very natural, perhaps. Ninety-nine out of a hundred would do the same. Of course,
he cannot be aware of the importance to me. Well, my dear Miss Elliot,
I hope and trust you will be very happy. Mr Elliot has sense
to understand the value of such a woman. Your peace will not be
shipwrecked as mine has been. You are safe in all worldly matters,
and safe in his character. He will not be led astray; he will not be
misled by others to his ruin." "No," said Anne, "I can readily believe all that of my cousin. He seems to have a calm decided temper, not at all open
to dangerous impressions. I consider him with great respect. I have no reason, from any thing that has fallen within my observation,
to do otherwise. But I have not known him long; and he is not a man,
I think, to be known intimately soon. Will not this manner
of speaking of him, Mrs Smith, convince you that he is nothing to me? Surely this must be calm enough. And, upon my word, he is nothing to me. Should he ever propose to me (which I have very little reason to imagine
he has any thought of doing), I shall not accept him. I assure you
I shall not. I assure you, Mr Elliot had not the share which
you have been supposing, in whatever pleasure the concert
of last night might afford:  not Mr Elliot; it is not Mr Elliot that--"

She stopped, regretting with a deep blush that she had implied so much;
but less would hardly have been sufficient. Mrs Smith would hardly
have believed so soon in Mr Elliot's failure, but from the perception
of there being a somebody else. As it was, she instantly submitted,
and with all the semblance of seeing nothing beyond; and Anne,
eager to escape farther notice, was impatient to know why Mrs Smith
should have fancied she was to marry Mr Elliot; where she could have
received the idea, or from whom she could have heard it. "Do tell me how it first came into your head." "It first came into my head," replied Mrs Smith, "upon finding how much
you were together, and feeling it to be the most probable thing
in the world to be wished for by everybody belonging to either of you;
and you may depend upon it that all your acquaintance have disposed of you
in the same way. But I never heard it spoken of till two days ago." "And has it indeed been spoken of?" "Did you observe the woman who opened the door to you when
you called yesterday?" "No. Was not it Mrs Speed, as usual, or the maid? I observed
no one in particular." "It was my friend Mrs Rooke; Nurse Rooke; who, by-the-bye,
had a great curiosity to see you, and was delighted to be in the way
to let you in. She came away from Marlborough Buildings only on Sunday;
and she it was who told me you were to marry Mr Elliot. She had had it from Mrs Wallis herself, which did not seem bad authority. She sat an hour with me on Monday evening, and gave me the whole history." "The whole history," repeated Anne, laughing. "She could not make
a very long history, I think, of one such little article
of unfounded news." Mrs Smith said nothing. "But," continued Anne, presently, "though there is no truth in my having
this claim on Mr Elliot, I should be extremely happy to be of use to you
in any way that I could. Shall I mention to him your being in Bath? Shall I take any message?" "No, I thank you:  no, certainly not. In the warmth of the moment,
and under a mistaken impression, I might, perhaps, have endeavoured
to interest you in some circumstances; but not now. No, I thank you,
I have nothing to trouble you with." "I think you spoke of having known Mr Elliot many years?" "I did." "Not before he was married, I suppose?" "Yes; he was not married when I knew him first." "And--were you much acquainted?" "Intimately." "Indeed! Then do tell me what he was at that time of life. I have a great curiosity to know what Mr Elliot was as a very young man. Was he at all such as he appears now?" "I have not seen Mr Elliot these three years," was Mrs Smith's answer,
given so gravely that it was impossible to pursue the subject farther;
and Anne felt that she had gained nothing but an increase of curiosity. They were both silent:  Mrs Smith very thoughtful. At last--

"I beg your pardon, my dear Miss Elliot," she cried, in her
natural tone of cordiality, "I beg your pardon for the short answers
I have been giving you, but I have been uncertain what I ought to do. I have been doubting and considering as to what I ought to tell you. There were many things to be taken into the account. One hates
to be officious, to be giving bad impressions, making mischief. Even the smooth surface of family-union seems worth preserving,
though there may be nothing durable beneath. However, I have determined;
I think I am right; I think you ought to be made acquainted
with Mr Elliot's real character. Though I fully believe that,
at present, you have not the smallest intention of accepting him,
there is no saying what may happen. You might, some time or other,
be differently affected towards him. Hear the truth, therefore,
now, while you are unprejudiced. Mr Elliot is a man without heart
or conscience; a designing, wary, cold-blooded being, who thinks
only of himself; whom for his own interest or ease, would be guilty
of any cruelty, or any treachery, that could be perpetrated without
risk of his general character. He has no feeling for others. Those whom he has been the chief cause of leading into ruin,
he can neglect and desert without the smallest compunction. He is totally beyond the reach of any sentiment of justice or compassion. Oh! he is black at heart, hollow and black!" Anne's astonished air, and exclamation of wonder, made her pause,
and in a calmer manner, she added,

"My expressions startle you. You must allow for an injured, angry woman. But I will try to command myself. I will not abuse him. I will only tell you what I have found him. Facts shall speak. He was the intimate friend of my dear husband, who trusted and loved him,
and thought him as good as himself. The intimacy had been formed
before our marriage. I found them most intimate friends; and I, too,
became excessively pleased with Mr Elliot, and entertained
the highest opinion of him. At nineteen, you know, one does not
think very seriously; but Mr Elliot appeared to me quite as good as others,
and much more agreeable than most others, and we were almost
always together. We were principally in town, living in very good style. He was then the inferior in circumstances; he was then the poor one;
he had chambers in the Temple, and it was as much as he could do
to support the appearance of a gentleman. He had always a home
with us whenever he chose it; he was always welcome; he was like a brother. My poor Charles, who had the finest, most generous spirit in the world,
would have divided his last farthing with him; and I know that his purse
was open to him; I know that he often assisted him." "This must have been about that very period of Mr Elliot's life,"
said Anne, "which has always excited my particular curiosity. It must have been about the same time that he became known to
my father and sister. I never knew him myself; I only heard of him;
but there was a something in his conduct then, with regard to
my father and sister, and afterwards in the circumstances of his marriage,
which I never could quite reconcile with present times. It seemed
to announce a different sort of man." "I know it all, I know it all," cried Mrs Smith. "He had been
introduced to Sir Walter and your sister before I was acquainted with him,
but I heard him speak of them for ever. I know he was invited
and encouraged, and I know he did not choose to go. I can satisfy you,
perhaps, on points which you would little expect; and as to his marriage,
I knew all about it at the time. I was privy to all the fors and againsts;
I was the friend to whom he confided his hopes and plans; and though
I did not know his wife previously, her inferior situation in society,
indeed, rendered that impossible, yet I knew her all her life afterwards,
or at least till within the last two years of her life, and can answer
any question you may wish to put." "Nay," said Anne, "I have no particular enquiry to make about her. I have always understood they were not a happy couple. But I should
like to know why, at that time of his life, he should slight
my father's acquaintance as he did. My father was certainly disposed
to take very kind and proper notice of him. Why did Mr Elliot draw back?" "Mr Elliot," replied Mrs Smith, "at that period of his life,
had one object in view:  to make his fortune, and by a rather quicker
process than the law. He was determined to make it by marriage. He was determined, at least, not to mar it by an imprudent marriage;
and I know it was his belief (whether justly or not, of course
I cannot decide), that your father and sister, in their civilities
and invitations, were designing a match between the heir
and the young lady, and it was impossible that such a match
should have answered his ideas of wealth and independence. That was his motive for drawing back, I can assure you. He told me the whole story. He had no concealments with me. It was curious, that having just left you behind me in Bath,
my first and principal acquaintance on marrying should be your cousin;
and that, through him, I should be continually hearing of your father
and sister. He described one Miss Elliot, and I thought
very affectionately of the other." "Perhaps," cried Anne, struck by a sudden idea, "you sometimes
spoke of me to Mr Elliot?" "To be sure I did; very often. I used to boast of my own Anne Elliot,
and vouch for your being a very different creature from--"

She checked herself just in time. "This accounts for something which Mr Elliot said last night,"
cried Anne. "This explains it. I found he had been used to hear of me. I could not comprehend how. What wild imaginations one forms where
dear self is concerned! How sure to be mistaken! But I beg your pardon;
I have interrupted you. Mr Elliot married then completely for money? The circumstances, probably, which first opened your eyes
to his character." Mrs Smith hesitated a little here. "Oh! those things are too common. When one lives in the world, a man or woman's marrying for money
is too common to strike one as it ought. I was very young,
and associated only with the young, and we were a thoughtless,
gay set, without any strict rules of conduct. We lived for enjoyment. I think differently now; time and sickness and sorrow have given me
other notions; but at that period I must own I saw nothing reprehensible
in what Mr Elliot was doing. `To do the best for himself,'
passed as a duty." "But was not she a very low woman?" "Yes; which I objected to, but he would not regard. Money, money,
was all that he wanted. Her father was a grazier, her grandfather
had been a butcher, but that was all nothing. She was a fine woman,
had had a decent education, was brought forward by some cousins,
thrown by chance into Mr Elliot's company, and fell in love with him;
and not a difficulty or a scruple was there on his side,
with respect to her birth. All his caution was spent in being secured
of the real amount of her fortune, before he committed himself. Depend upon it, whatever esteem Mr Elliot may have for his own situation
in life now, as a young man he had not the smallest value for it. His chance for the Kellynch estate was something, but all the honour
of the family he held as cheap as dirt. I have often heard him declare,
that if baronetcies were saleable, anybody should have his
for fifty pounds, arms and motto, name and livery included;
but I will not pretend to repeat half that I used to hear him say
on that subject. It would not be fair; and yet you ought to have proof,
for what is all this but assertion, and you shall have proof." "Indeed, my dear Mrs Smith, I want none," cried Anne. "You have asserted
nothing contradictory to what Mr Elliot appeared to be some years ago. This is all in confirmation, rather, of what we used to hear and believe. I am more curious to know why he should be so different now." "But for my satisfaction, if you will have the goodness to ring for Mary;
stay:  I am sure you will have the still greater goodness of
going yourself into my bedroom, and bringing me the small inlaid box
which you will find on the upper shelf of the closet." Anne, seeing her friend to be earnestly bent on it, did as she was desired. The box was brought and placed before her, and Mrs Smith, sighing over it
as she unlocked it, said--

"This is full of papers belonging to him, to my husband;
a small portion only of what I had to look over when I lost him. The letter I am looking for was one written by Mr Elliot to him
before our marriage, and happened to be saved; why, one can hardly imagine. But he was careless and immethodical, like other men, about those things;
and when I came to examine his papers, I found it with others
still more trivial, from different people scattered here and there,
while many letters and memorandums of real importance had been destroyed. Here it is; I would not burn it, because being even then very little
satisfied with Mr Elliot, I was determined to preserve every document
of former intimacy. I have now another motive for being glad
that I can produce it." This was the letter, directed to "Charles Smith, Esq. Tunbridge Wells,"
and dated from London, as far back as July, 1803: --

"Dear Smith,--I have received yours. Your kindness almost overpowers me. I wish nature had made such hearts as yours more common, but I have
lived three-and-twenty years in the world, and have seen none like it. At present, believe me, I have no need of your services,
being in cash again. Give me joy:  I have got rid of Sir Walter and Miss. They are gone back to Kellynch, and almost made me swear to visit them
this summer; but my first visit to Kellynch will be with a surveyor,
to tell me how to bring it with best advantage to the hammer. The baronet, nevertheless, is not unlikely to marry again;
he is quite fool enough. If he does, however, they will leave me in peace,
which may be a decent equivalent  for the reversion. He is worse
than last year. "I wish I had any name but Elliot. I am sick of it. The name of Walter
I can drop, thank God! and I desire you will never insult me
with my second W. again, meaning, for the rest of my life,
to be only yours truly,--Wm. Elliot." Such a letter could not be read without putting Anne in a glow;
and Mrs Smith, observing the high colour in her face, said--

"The language, I know, is highly disrespectful. Though I have forgot
the exact terms, I have a perfect impression of the general meaning. But it shows you the man. Mark his professions to my poor husband. Can any thing be stronger?" Anne could not immediately get over the shock and mortification
of finding such words applied to her father. She was obliged to recollect
that her seeing the letter was a violation of the laws of honour,
that no one ought to be judged or to be known by such testimonies,
that no private correspondence could bear the eye of others,
before she could recover calmness enough to return the letter
which she had been meditating over, and say--

"Thank you. This is full proof undoubtedly; proof of every thing
you were saying. But why be acquainted with us now?" "I can explain this too," cried Mrs Smith, smiling. "Can you really?" "Yes. I have shewn you Mr Elliot as he was a dozen years ago,
and I will shew him as he is now. I cannot produce written proof again,
but I can give as authentic oral testimony as you can desire, of what
he is now wanting, and what he is now doing. He is no hypocrite now. He truly wants to marry you. His present attentions to your family
are very sincere:  quite from the heart. I will give you my authority:
his friend Colonel Wallis." "Colonel Wallis! you are acquainted with him?" "No. It does not come to me in quite so direct a line as that;
it takes a bend or two, but nothing of consequence. The stream
is as good as at first; the little rubbish it collects in the turnings
is easily moved away. Mr Elliot talks unreservedly to Colonel Wallis
of his views on you, which said Colonel Wallis, I imagine to be,
in himself, a sensible, careful, discerning sort of character;
but Colonel Wallis has a very pretty silly wife, to whom
he tells things which he had better not, and he repeats it all to her. She in the overflowing spirits of her recovery, repeats it all
to her nurse; and the nurse  knowing my acquaintance with you,
very naturally brings it all to me. On Monday evening, my good friend
Mrs Rooke let me thus much into the secrets of Marlborough Buildings. When I talked of a whole history, therefore, you see I was
not romancing so much as you supposed." "My dear Mrs Smith, your authority is deficient. This will not do. Mr Elliot's having any views on me will not in the least account
for the efforts he made towards a reconciliation with my father. That was all prior to my coming to Bath. I found them on
the most friendly terms when I arrived." "I know you did; I know it all perfectly, but--"

"Indeed, Mrs Smith, we must not expect to get real information
in such a line. Facts or opinions which are to pass through the hands
of so many, to be misconceived by folly in one, and ignorance in another,
can hardly have much truth left." "Only give me a hearing. You will soon be able to judge of
the general credit due, by listening to some particulars
which you can yourself immediately contradict or confirm. Nobody supposes that you were his first inducement. He had seen you
indeed, before he came to Bath, and admired you, but without
knowing it to be you. So says my historian, at least. Is this true? Did he see you last summer or autumn, `somewhere down in the west,'
to use her own words, without knowing it to be you?" "He certainly did. So far it is very true. At Lyme. I happened to be at Lyme." "Well," continued Mrs Smith, triumphantly, "grant my friend the credit
due to the establishment of the first point asserted. He saw you then
at Lyme, and liked you so well as to be exceedingly pleased
to meet with you again in Camden Place, as Miss Anne Elliot,
and from that moment, I have no doubt, had a double motive
in his visits there. But there was another, and an earlier,
which I will now explain. If there is anything in my story which you know
to be either false or improbable, stop me. My account states,
that your sister's friend, the lady now staying with you,
whom I have heard you mention, came to Bath with Miss Elliot and Sir Walter
as long ago as September (in short when they first came themselves),
and has been staying there ever since; that she is a clever, insinuating,
handsome woman, poor and plausible, and altogether such in situation
and manner, as to give a general idea, among Sir Walter's acquaintance,
of her meaning to be Lady Elliot, and as general a surprise
that Miss Elliot should be apparently, blind to the danger." Here Mrs Smith paused a moment; but Anne had not a word to say,
and she continued--

"This was the light in which it appeared to those who knew the family,
long before you returned to it; and Colonel Wallis had his eye
upon your father enough to be sensible of it, though he did not then
visit in Camden Place; but his regard for Mr Elliot gave him an interest
in watching all that was going on there, and when Mr Elliot came to Bath
for a day or two, as he happened to do a little before Christmas,
Colonel Wallis made him acquainted with the appearance of things,
and the reports beginning to prevail. Now you are to understand,
that time had worked a very material change in Mr Elliot's opinions
as to the value of a baronetcy. Upon all points of blood and connexion
he is a completely altered man. Having long had as much money
as he could spend, nothing to wish for on the side of avarice
or indulgence, he has been gradually learning to pin his happiness
upon the consequence he is heir to. I thought it coming on
before our acquaintance ceased, but it is now a confirmed feeling. He cannot bear the idea of not being Sir William. You may guess,
therefore, that the news he heard from his friend could not be
very agreeable, and you may guess what it produced; the resolution
of coming back to Bath as soon as possible, and of fixing himself here
for a time, with the view of renewing his former acquaintance,
and recovering such a footing in the family as might give him the means
of ascertaining the degree of his danger, and of circumventing the lady
if he found it material. This was agreed upon between the two friends
as the only thing to be done; and Colonel Wallis was to assist
in every way that he could. He was to be introduced, and Mrs Wallis
was to be introduced, and everybody was to be introduced. Mr Elliot came back accordingly; and on application was forgiven,
as you know, and re-admitted into the family; and there it was
his constant object, and his only object (till your arrival
added another motive), to watch Sir Walter and Mrs Clay. He omitted no opportunity of being with them, threw himself in their way,
called at all hours; but I need not be particular on this subject. You can imagine what an artful man would do; and with this guide,
perhaps, may recollect what you have seen him do." "Yes," said Anne, "you tell me nothing which does not accord with
what I have known, or could imagine. There is always something offensive
in the details of cunning. The manoeuvres of selfishness and duplicity
must ever be revolting, but I have heard nothing which really surprises me. I know those who would be shocked by such a representation of Mr Elliot,
who would have difficulty in believing it; but I have never been satisfied. I have always wanted some other motive for his conduct than appeared. I should like to know his present opinion, as to the probability
of the event he has been in dread of; whether he considers the danger
to be lessening or not." "Lessening, I understand," replied Mrs Smith. "He thinks Mrs Clay
afraid of him, aware that he sees through her, and not daring to proceed
as she might do in his absence. But since he must be absent
some time or other, I do not perceive how he can ever be secure
while she holds her present influence. Mrs Wallis has an amusing idea,
as nurse tells me, that it is to be put into the marriage articles
when you and Mr Elliot marry, that your father is not to marry Mrs Clay. A scheme, worthy of Mrs Wallis's understanding, by all accounts;
but my sensible nurse Rooke sees the absurdity of it. `Why, to be sure,
ma'am,' said she, `it would not prevent his marrying anybody else.' And, indeed, to own the truth, I do not think nurse, in her heart,
is a very strenuous opposer of Sir Walter's making a second match. She must be allowed to be a favourer of matrimony, you know;
and (since self will intrude) who can say that she may not have
some flying visions of attending the next Lady Elliot, through
Mrs Wallis's recommendation?" "I am very glad to know all this," said Anne, after a little
thoughtfulness. "It will be more painful to me in some respects
to be in company with him, but I shall know better what to do. My line of conduct will be more direct. Mr Elliot is evidently
a disingenuous, artificial, worldly man, who has never had
any better principle to guide him than selfishness." But Mr Elliot was not done with. Mrs Smith had been carried away
from her first direction, and Anne had forgotten, in the interest
of her own family concerns, how much had been originally implied
against him; but her attention was now called to the explanation
of those first hints, and she listened to a recital which,
if it did not perfectly justify the unqualified bitterness of Mrs Smith,
proved him to have been very unfeeling in his conduct towards her;
very deficient both in justice and compassion. She learned that (the intimacy between them continuing unimpaired
by Mr Elliot's marriage) they had been as before always together,
and Mr Elliot had led his friend into expenses much beyond his fortune. Mrs Smith did not want to take blame to herself, and was most tender
of throwing any on her husband; but Anne could collect that their income
had never been equal to their style of living, and that from the first
there had been a great deal of general and joint extravagance. From his wife's account of him she could discern Mr Smith to have been
a man of warm feelings, easy temper, careless habits, and not strong
understanding, much more amiable than his friend, and very unlike him,
led by him, and probably despised by him. Mr Elliot, raised by
his marriage to great affluence, and disposed to every gratification
of pleasure and vanity which could be commanded without involving himself,
(for with all his self-indulgence he had become a prudent man),
and beginning to be rich, just as his friend ought to have found himself
to be poor, seemed to have had no concern at all for that friend's
probable finances, but, on the contrary, had been prompting and
encouraging expenses which could end only in ruin; and the Smiths
accordingly had been ruined. The husband had died just in time to be spared the full knowledge of it. They had previously known embarrassments enough to try the friendship
of their friends, and to prove that Mr Elliot's had better not be tried;
but it was not till his death that the wretched state of his affairs
was fully known. With a confidence in Mr Elliot's regard,
more creditable to his feelings than his judgement, Mr Smith had
appointed him the executor of his will; but Mr Elliot would not act,
and the difficulties and distress which this refusal had heaped on her,
in addition to the inevitable sufferings of her situation, had been such
as could not be related without anguish of spirit, or listened to
without corresponding indignation. Anne was shewn some letters of his on the occasion, answers to
urgent applications from Mrs Smith, which all breathed the same
stern resolution of not engaging in a fruitless trouble, and,
under a cold civility, the same hard-hearted indifference
to any of the evils it might bring on her. It was a dreadful picture
of ingratitude and inhumanity; and Anne felt, at some moments,
that no flagrant open crime could have been worse. She had a great deal
to listen to; all the particulars of past sad scenes, all the minutiae
of distress upon distress, which in former conversations had been
merely hinted at, were dwelt on now with a natural indulgence. Anne could perfectly comprehend the exquisite relief, and was only
the more inclined to wonder at the composure of her friend's
usual state of mind. There was one circumstance in the history of her grievances
of particular irritation. She had good reason to believe that
some property of her husband in the West Indies, which had been
for many years under a sort of sequestration for the payment
of its own incumbrances, might be recoverable by proper measures;
and this property, though not large, would be enough to make
her comparatively rich. But there was nobody to stir in it. Mr Elliot would do nothing, and she could do nothing herself,
equally disabled from personal exertion by her state of
bodily weakness, and from employing others by her want of money. She had no natural connexions to assist her even with their counsel,
and she could not afford to purchase the assistance of the law. This was a cruel aggravation of actually straitened means. To feel that she ought to be in better circumstances,
that a little trouble in the right place might do it,
and to fear that delay might be even weakening her claims,
was hard to bear. It was on this point that she had hoped to engage Anne's good offices
with Mr Elliot. She had previously, in the anticipation
of their marriage, been very apprehensive of losing her friend by it;
but on being assured that he could have made no attempt of that nature,
since he did not even know her to be in Bath, it immediately occurred,
that something might be done in her favour by the influence of the woman
he loved, and she had been hastily preparing to interest Anne's feelings,
as far as the observances due to Mr Elliot's character would allow,
when Anne's refutation of the supposed engagement changed
the face of everything; and while it took from her the new-formed hope
of succeeding in the object of her first anxiety, left her at least
the comfort of telling the whole story her own way. After listening to this full description of Mr Elliot, Anne could not but
express some surprise at Mrs Smith's having spoken of him so favourably
in the beginning of their conversation. "She had seemed to recommend
and praise him!" "My dear," was Mrs Smith's reply, "there was nothing else to be done. I considered your marrying him as certain, though he might not yet
have made the offer, and I could no more speak the truth of him,
than if he had been your husband. My heart bled for you,
as I talked of happiness; and yet he is sensible, he is agreeable,
and with such a woman as you, it was not absolutely hopeless. He was very unkind to his first wife. They were wretched together. But she was too ignorant and giddy for respect, and he had never loved her. I was willing to hope that you must fare better." Anne could just acknowledge within herself such a possibility
of having been induced to marry him, as made her shudder at the idea
of the misery which must have followed. It was just possible that
she might have been persuaded by Lady Russell! And under such
a supposition, which would have been most miserable, when time had
disclosed all, too late? It was very desirable that Lady Russell should be no longer deceived;
and one of the concluding arrangements of this important conference,
which carried them through the greater part of the morning,
was, that Anne had full liberty to communicate to her friend
everything relative to Mrs Smith, in which his conduct was involved. Chapter 22


Anne went home to think over all that she had heard. In one point,
her feelings were relieved by this knowledge of Mr Elliot. There was no longer anything of tenderness due to him. He stood as
opposed to Captain Wentworth, in all his own unwelcome obtrusiveness;
and the evil of his attentions last night, the irremediable mischief
he might have done, was considered with sensations unqualified, unperplexed. Pity for him was all over. But this was the only point of relief. In every other respect, in looking around her, or penetrating forward,
she saw more to distrust and to apprehend. She was concerned
for the disappointment and pain Lady Russell would be feeling;
for the mortifications which must be hanging over her father and sister,
and had all the distress of foreseeing many evils, without knowing
how to avert any one of them. She was most thankful for her own
knowledge of him. She had never considered herself as entitled to reward
for not slighting an old friend like Mrs Smith, but here was
a reward indeed springing from it! Mrs Smith had been able to tell her
what no one else could have done. Could the knowledge have
been extended through her family? But this was a vain idea. She must talk to Lady Russell, tell her, consult with her,
and having done her best, wait the event with as much composure
as possible; and after all, her greatest want of composure would be
in that quarter of the mind which could not be opened to Lady Russell;
in that flow of anxieties and fears which must be all to herself. She found, on reaching home, that she had, as she intended,
escaped seeing Mr Elliot; that he had called and paid them
a long morning visit; but hardly had she congratulated herself,
and felt safe, when she heard that he was coming again in the evening. "I had not the smallest intention of asking him," said Elizabeth,
with affected carelessness, "but he gave so many hints;
so Mrs Clay says, at least." "Indeed, I do say it. I never saw anybody in my life spell harder
for an invitation. Poor man! I was really in pain for him;
for your hard-hearted sister, Miss Anne, seems bent on cruelty." "Oh!" cried Elizabeth, "I have been rather too much used to the game
to be soon overcome by a gentleman's hints. However, when I found
how excessively he was regretting that he should miss my father
this morning, I gave way immediately, for I would never really omit
an opportunity of bring him and Sir Walter together. They appear to
so much advantage in company with each other. Each behaving so pleasantly. Mr Elliot looking up with so much respect." "Quite delightful!" cried Mrs Clay, not daring, however,
to turn her eyes towards Anne. "Exactly like father and son! Dear Miss Elliot, may I not say father and son?" "Oh! I lay no embargo on any body's words. If you will have such
ideas! But, upon my word, I am scarcely sensible of his attentions
being beyond those of other men." "My dear Miss Elliot!" exclaimed Mrs Clay, lifting her hands and eyes,
and sinking all the rest of her astonishment in a convenient silence. "Well, my dear Penelope, you need not be so alarmed about him. I did invite him, you know. I sent him away with smiles. When I found he was really going to his friends at Thornberry Park
for the whole day to-morrow, I had compassion on him." Anne admired the good acting of the friend, in being able to shew
such pleasure as she did, in the expectation and in the actual arrival
of the very person whose presence must really be interfering with
her prime object. It was impossible but that Mrs Clay must hate
the sight of Mr Elliot; and yet she could assume a most obliging,
placid look, and appear quite satisfied with the curtailed license
of devoting herself only half as much to Sir Walter as she would have
done otherwise. To Anne herself it was most distressing to see Mr Elliot enter the room;
and quite painful to have him approach and speak to her. She had been used before to feel that he could not be always quite sincere,
but now she saw insincerity in everything. His attentive deference
to her father, contrasted with his former language, was odious;
and when she thought of his cruel conduct towards Mrs Smith,
she could hardly bear the sight of his present smiles and mildness,
or the sound of his artificial good sentiments. She meant to avoid any such alteration of manners as might provoke
a remonstrance on his side. It was a great object to her to escape
all enquiry or eclat; but it was her intention to be as decidedly cool
to him as might be compatible with their relationship; and to retrace,
as quietly as she could, the few steps of unnecessary intimacy she had
been gradually led along. She was accordingly more guarded,
and more cool, than she had been the night before. He wanted to animate her curiosity again as to how and where
he could have heard her formerly praised; wanted very much
to be gratified by more solicitation; but the charm was broken:
he found that the heat and animation of a public room was necessary
to kindle his modest cousin's vanity; he found, at least, that it was
not to be done now, by any of those attempts which he could hazard
among the too-commanding claims of the others. He little surmised
that it was a subject acting now exactly against his interest,
bringing immediately to her thoughts all those parts of his conduct
which were least excusable. She had some satisfaction in finding that he was really going out of Bath
the next morning, going early, and that he would be gone the greater part
of two days. He was invited again to Camden Place the very evening of
his return; but from Thursday to Saturday evening his absence was certain. It was bad enough that a Mrs Clay should be always before her;
but that a deeper hypocrite should be added to their party,
seemed the destruction of everything like peace and comfort.