"I reckon the Cosmos is cracked," said Usher, and fell asprawl
in his round office chair. "Now, see here," vociferated the stranger, striking the table,
but speaking in a voice that was all the more mysterious
because it was comparatively mild and rational though still resounding. "I won't let you in. I want--"

     "Who in hell are you?" yelled Usher, suddenly sitting up straight. "I think the gentleman's name is Todd," said the priest. Then he picked up the pink slip of newspaper. "I fear you don't read the Society papers properly," he said,
and began to read out in a monotonous voice, "`Or locked in
the jewelled bosoms of our city's gayest leaders; but there is talk
of a pretty parody of the manners and customs of the other end
of Society's scale.' There's been a big Slum Dinner up at
Pilgrim's Pond tonight; and a man, one of the guests, disappeared. Mr Ireton Todd is a good host, and has tracked him here,
without even waiting to take off his fancy-dress." "What man do you mean?" "I mean the man with comically ill-fitting clothes you saw
running across the ploughed field. Hadn't you better go and
investigate him? He will be rather impatient to get back to his champagne,
from which he ran away in such a hurry, when the convict with the gun
hove in sight." "Do you seriously mean--" began the official. "Why, look here, Mr Usher," said Father Brown quietly,
"you said the machine couldn't make a mistake; and in one sense it didn't. But the other machine did; the machine that worked it. You assumed that the man in rags jumped at the name of Lord Falconroy,
because he was Lord Falconroy's murderer. He jumped at the name
of Lord Falconroy because he is Lord Falconroy." "Then why the blazes didn't he say so?" demanded the staring Usher. "He felt his plight and recent panic were hardly patrician,"
replied the priest, "so he tried to keep the name back at first. But he was just going to tell it you, when"--and Father Brown looked
down at his boots--"when a woman found another name for him." "But you can't be so mad as to say," said Greywood Usher,
very white, "that Lord Falconroy was Drugger Davis." The priest looked at him very earnestly, but with a baffling
and undecipherable face. "I am not saying anything about it," he said. "I leave
all the rest to you. Your pink paper says that the title
was recently revived for him; but those papers are very unreliable. It says he was in the States in youth; but the whole story seems
very strange. Davis and Falconroy are both pretty considerable cowards,
but so are lots of other men. I would not hang a dog on my own opinion
about this. But I think," he went on softly and reflectively,
"I think you Americans are too modest. I think you idealize
the English aristocracy--even in assuming it to be so aristocratic. You see a good-looking Englishman in evening-dress; you know
he's in the House of Lords; and you fancy he has a father. You don't allow for our national buoyancy and uplift. Many of our
most influential noblemen have not only risen recently, but--"

     "Oh, stop it!" cried Greywood Usher, wringing one lean hand
in impatience against a shade of irony in the other's face. "Don't stay talking to this lunatic!" cried Todd brutally. "Take me to my friend." Next morning Father Brown appeared with the same demure expression,
carrying yet another piece of pink newspaper. "I'm afraid you neglect the fashionable press rather," he said,
"but this cutting may interest you." Usher read the headlines, "Last-Trick's Strayed Revellers:
Mirthful Incident near Pilgrim's Pond." The paragraph went on:
"A laughable occurrence took place outside Wilkinson's Motor Garage
last night. A policeman on duty had his attention drawn by larrikins
to a man in prison dress who was stepping with considerable coolness
into the steering-seat of a pretty high-toned Panhard; he was accompanied
by a girl wrapped in a ragged shawl. On the police interfering,
the young woman threw back the shawl, and all recognized
Millionaire Todd's daughter, who had just come from the Slum Freak Dinner
at the Pond, where all the choicest guests were in a similar deshabille. She and the gentleman who had donned prison uniform were going for
the customary joy-ride." Under the pink slip Mr Usher found a strip of a later paper,
headed, "Astounding Escape of Millionaire's Daughter with Convict. She had Arranged Freak Dinner. Now Safe in--"

     Mr Greenwood Usher lifted his eyes, but Father Brown was gone. VI. The Head of Caesar


THERE is somewhere in Brompton or Kensington an interminable avenue
of tall houses, rich but largely empty, that looks like a terrace of tombs. The very steps up to the dark front doors seem as steep as
the side of pyramids; one would hesitate to knock at the door,
lest it should be opened by a mummy. But a yet more depressing feature
in the grey facade is its telescopic length and changeless continuity. The pilgrim walking down it begins to think he will never come to
a break or a corner; but there is one exception--a very small one,
but hailed by the pilgrim almost with a shout. There is a sort of mews
between two of the tall mansions, a mere slit like the crack of a door
by comparison with the street, but just large enough to permit
a pigmy ale-house or eating-house, still allowed by the rich to their
stable-servants, to stand in the angle. There is something cheery in its
very dinginess, and something free and elfin in its very insignificance. At the feet of those grey stone giants it looks like a lighted house
of dwarfs. Anyone passing the place during a certain autumn evening,
itself almost fairylike, might have seen a hand pull aside
the red half-blind which (along with some large white lettering)
half hid the interior from the street, and a face peer out not unlike
a rather innocent goblin's. It was, in fact, the face of one with
the harmless human name of Brown, formerly priest of Cobhole in Essex,
and now working in London. His friend, Flambeau, a semi-official
investigator, was sitting opposite him, making his last notes of a case
he had cleared up in the neighbourhood. They were sitting at a small table,
close up to the window, when the priest pulled the curtain back
and looked out. He waited till a stranger in the street had
passed the window, to let the curtain fall into its place again. Then his round eyes rolled to the large white lettering on the window
above his head, and then strayed to the next table, at which sat only
a navvy with beer and cheese, and a young girl with red hair and
a glass of milk. Then (seeing his friend put away the pocket-book),
he said softly:

     "If you've got ten minutes, I wish you'd follow that man with
the false nose." Flambeau looked up in surprise; but the girl with the red hair
also looked up, and with something that was stronger than astonishment. She was simply and even loosely dressed in light brown sacking stuff;
but she was a lady, and even, on a second glance, a rather needlessly
haughty one. "The man with the false nose!" repeated Flambeau. "Who's he?" "I haven't a notion," answered Father Brown. "I want you
to find out; I ask it as a favour. He went down there"--and he jerked
his thumb over his shoulder in one of his undistinguished gestures--
"and can't have passed three lamp-posts yet. I only want to know
the direction." Flambeau gazed at his friend for some time, with an expression
between perplexity and amusement; and then, rising from the table;
squeezed his huge form out of the little door of the dwarf tavern,
and melted into the twilight. Father Brown took a small book out of his pocket and began
to read steadily; he betrayed no consciousness of the fact that
the red-haired lady had left her own table and sat down opposite him. At last she leaned over and said in a low, strong voice:
"Why do you say that? How do you know it's false?" He lifted his rather heavy eyelids, which fluttered in
considerable embarrassment. Then his dubious eye roamed again to
the white lettering on the glass front of the public-house. The young woman's eyes followed his, and rested there also,
but in pure puzzledom. "No," said Father Brown, answering her thoughts. "It doesn't say
`Sela', like the thing in the Psalms; I read it like that myself when
I was wool-gathering just now; it says `Ales.'" "Well?" inquired the staring young lady. "What does it matter
what it says?" His ruminating eye roved to the girl's light canvas sleeve,
round the wrist of which ran a very slight thread of artistic pattern,
just enough to distinguish it from a working-dress of a common woman
and make it more like the working-dress of a lady art-student. He seemed to find much food for thought in this; but his reply was
very slow and hesitant. "You see, madam," he said, "from outside
the place looks--well, it is a perfectly decent place--but ladies
like you don't--don't generally think so. They never go into such places
from choice, except--"

     "Well?" she repeated. "Except an unfortunate few who don't go in to drink milk." "You are a most singular person," said the young lady. "What is your object in all this?" "Not to trouble you about it," he replied, very gently. "Only to arm myself with knowledge enough to help you, if ever
you freely ask my help." "But why should I need help?" He continued his dreamy monologue. "You couldn't have come in
to see protegees, humble friends, that sort of thing, or you'd have
gone through into the parlour...and you couldn't have come in because
you were ill, or you'd have spoken to the woman of the place,
who's obviously respectable...besides, you don't look ill in that way,
but only unhappy.... This street is the only original long lane
that has no turning; and the houses on both sides are shut up....