15:31 Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 15:32 And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all
their days. 15:33 In the third year of Asa king of Judah began Baasha the son of
Ahijah to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, twenty and four years. 15:34 And he did evil in the sight of the LORD, and walked in the way
of Jeroboam, and in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin. 16:1 Then the word of the LORD came to Jehu the son of Hanani against
Baasha, saying, 16:2 Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and
made thee prince over my people Israel; and thou hast walked in the
way of Jeroboam, and hast made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me
to anger with their sins; 16:3 Behold, I will take away the posterity
of Baasha, and the posterity of his house; and will make thy house
like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat. 16:4 Him that dieth of Baasha in the city shall the dogs eat; and him
that dieth of his in the fields shall the fowls of the air eat. 16:5 Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his
might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel? 16:6 So Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in
Tirzah: and Elah his son reigned in his stead. 16:7 And also by the hand of the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani came
the word of the LORD against Baasha, and against his house, even for
all the evil that he did in the sight of the LORD, in provoking him to
anger with the work of his hands, in being like the house of Jeroboam;
and because he killed him. 16:8 In the twenty and sixth year of Asa king of Judah began Elah the
son of Baasha to reign over Israel in Tirzah, two years. 16:9 And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired
against him, as he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house
of Arza steward of his house in Tirzah. 16:10 And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him, in the twenty
and seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead. 16:11 And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat
on his throne, that he slew all the house of Baasha: he left him not
one that pisseth against a wall, neither of his kinsfolks, nor of his
friends. 16:12 Thus did Zimri destroy all the house of Baasha, according to the
word of the LORD, which he spake against Baasha by Jehu the prophet. 16:13 For all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, by
which they sinned, and by which they made Israel to sin, in provoking
the LORD God of Israel to anger with their vanities. 16:14 Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel? 16:15 In the twenty and seventh year of Asa king of Judah did Zimri
reign seven days in Tirzah. And the people were encamped against
Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines. 16:16 And the people that were encamped heard say, Zimri hath
conspired, and hath also slain the king: wherefore all Israel made
Omri, the captain of the host, king over Israel that day in the camp. 16:17 And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and
they besieged Tirzah. 16:18 And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken,
that he went into the palace of the king's house, and burnt the king's
house over him with fire, and died. 16:19 For his sins which he sinned in doing evil in the sight of the
LORD, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did,
to make Israel to sin. 16:20 Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he
wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the
kings of Israel? 16:21 Then were the people of Israel divided into
two parts: half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to
make him king; and half followed Omri. 16:22 But the people that followed Omri prevailed against the people
that followed Tibni the son of Ginath: so Tibni died, and Omri
reigned. 16:23 In the thirty and first year of Asa king of Judah began Omri to
reign over Israel, twelve years: six years reigned he in Tirzah. 16:24 And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of
silver, and built on the hill, and called the name of the city which
he built, after the name of Shemer, owner of the hill, Samaria. 16:25 But Omri wrought evil in the eyes of the LORD, and did worse
than all that were before him. 16:26 For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and
in his sin wherewith he made Israel to sin, to provoke the LORD God of
Israel to anger with their vanities. 16:27 Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might
that he shewed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of
the kings of Israel? 16:28 So Omri slept with his fathers, and was
buried in Samaria: and Ahab his son reigned in his stead. 16:29 And in the thirty and eighth year of Asa king of Judah began
Ahab the son of Omri to reign over Israel: and Ahab the son of Omri
reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty and two years. 16:30 And Ahab the son of Omri did evil in the sight of the LORD above
all that were before him. 16:31 And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to
walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife
Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Zidonians, and went and
served Baal, and worshipped him. 16:32 And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which
he had built in Samaria. 16:33 And Ahab made a grove; and Ahab did more to provoke the LORD God
of Israel to anger than all the kings of Israel that were before him. 16:34 In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho: he laid the
foundation thereof in Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates
thereof in his youngest son Segub, according to the word of the LORD,
which he spake by Joshua the son of Nun. 17:1 And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the inhabitants of Gilead,
said unto Ahab, As the LORD God of Israel liveth, before whom I stand,
there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word. 17:2 And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, 17:3 Get thee
hence, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith,
that is before Jordan. 17:4 And it shall be, that thou shalt drink of the brook; and I have
commanded the ravens to feed thee there. 17:5 So he went and did according unto the word of the LORD: for he
went and dwelt by the brook Cherith, that is before Jordan. 17:6 And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and
bread and flesh in the evening; and he drank of the brook. 17:7 And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up,
because there had been no rain in the land. 17:8 And the word of the LORD came unto him, saying, 17:9 Arise, get
thee to Zarephath, which belongeth to Zidon, and dwell there: behold,
I have commanded a widow woman there to sustain thee. 17:10 So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate
of the city, behold, the widow woman was there gathering of sticks:
and he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water
in a vessel, that I may drink. 17:11 And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said,
Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thine hand. 17:12 And she said, As the LORD thy God liveth, I have not a cake, but
an handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a cruse: and,
behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for
me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. 17:13 And Elijah said unto her, Fear not; go and do as thou hast said:
but make me thereof a little cake first, and bring it unto me, and
after make for thee and for thy son. 17:14 For thus saith the LORD God of Israel, The barrel of meal shall
not waste, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that the
LORD sendeth rain upon the earth. 17:15 And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah: and she,
and he, and her house, did eat many days. 17:16 And the barrel of meal wasted not, neither did the cruse of oil
fail, according to the word of the LORD, which he spake by Elijah. 17:17 And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the
woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick; and his sickness was so
sore, that there was no breath left in him. 17:18 And she said unto Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou
man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and
to slay my son? 17:19 And he said unto her, Give me thy son. And he
took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into a loft, where he
abode, and laid him upon his own bed. 17:20 And he cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, hast thou
also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, by slaying her
son? 17:21 And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and
cried unto the LORD, and said, O LORD my God, I pray thee, let this
child's soul come into him again. 17:22 And the LORD heard the voice of Elijah; and the soul of the
child came into him again, and he revived. 17:23 And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the
chamber into the house, and delivered him unto his mother: and Elijah
said, See, thy son liveth. 17:24 And the woman said to Elijah, Now by this I know that thou art a
man of God, and that the word of the LORD in thy mouth is truth. 18:1 And it came to pass after many days, that the word of the LORD
came to Elijah in the third year, saying, Go, shew thyself unto Ahab;
and I will send rain upon the earth. 18:2 And Elijah went to shew himself unto Ahab. And there was a sore
famine in Samaria. 18:3 And Ahab called Obadiah, which was the governor of his house. (Now Obadiah feared the LORD greatly: 18:4 For it was so, when Jezebel
cut off the prophets of the LORD, that Obadiah took an hundred
prophets, and hid them by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and
water.) 18:5 And Ahab said unto Obadiah, Go into the land, unto all
fountains of water, and unto all brooks: peradventure we may find
grass to save the horses and mules alive, that we lose not all the
beasts. 18:6 So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it: Ahab
went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself. 18:7 And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him: and he
knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Art thou that my lord
Elijah? 18:8 And he answered him, I am: go, tell thy lord, Behold,
Elijah is here. 18:9 And he said, What have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy
servant into the hand of Ahab, to slay me? 18:10 As the LORD thy God
liveth, there is no nation or kingdom, whither my lord hath not sent
to seek thee: and when they said, He is not there; he took an oath of
the kingdom and nation, that they found thee not. 18:11 And now thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here. 18:12 And it shall come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that
the Spirit of the LORD shall carry thee whither I know not; and so
when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he shall slay me:
but I thy servant fear the LORD from my youth. 18:13 Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel slew the
prophets of the LORD, how I hid an hundred men of the LORD's prophets
by fifty in a cave, and fed them with bread and water? 18:14 And now
thou sayest, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here: and he shall
slay me. 18:15 And Elijah said, As the LORD of hosts liveth, before whom I
stand, I will surely shew myself unto him to day. 18:16 So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him: and Ahab went to
meet Elijah. 18:17 And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said unto
him, Art thou he that troubleth Israel? 18:18 And he answered, I have
not troubled Israel; but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have
forsaken the commandments of the LORD, and thou hast followed Baalim. 18:19 Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel unto mount
Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the
prophets of the groves four hundred, which eat at Jezebel's table. 18:20 So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the
prophets together unto mount Carmel. 18:21 And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye
between two opinions? if the LORD be God, follow him: but if Baal,
then follow him. And the people answered him not a word. 18:22 Then said Elijah unto the people, I, even I only, remain a
prophet of the LORD; but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty
men. 18:23 Let them therefore give us two bullocks; and let them choose one
bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on wood, and
put no fire under: and I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on
wood, and put no fire under: 18:24 And call ye on the name of your
gods, and I will call on the name of the LORD: and the God that
answereth by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and
said, It is well spoken. 18:25 And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose you one
bullock for yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call
on the name of your gods, but put no fire under. 18:26 And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed
it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon,
saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that
answered. And they leaped upon the altar which was made. 18:27 And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said,
Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he is talking, or he is pursuing,
or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and must be
awaked. 18:28 And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with
knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon them. 18:29 And it came to pass, when midday was past, and they prophesied
until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that there
was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded. 18:30 And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all
the people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the LORD
that was broken down. 18:31 And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the
tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the LORD came,
saying, Israel shall be thy name: 18:32 And with the stones he built
an altar in the name of the LORD: and he made a trench about the
altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.