The little procession stopped, and in a
few minutes the bleating of a lamb was heard. Through a back passage,
which led into the paddock behind the house, they saw the butcher leading
a lamb. "It is Daisy!" exclaimed Rose--"It's Daisy!" repeated all her companions. "Susan's lamb! Susan's lamb!" and there was a universal shout of joy. "Well, for my part," said the good butcher, as soon as he could be
heard,--"for my part, I would not be so cruel as Attorney Case for the
whole world. These poor brute beasts don't know aforehand what's going
to happen to them; and as for dying, it's what we must all do some time
or another; but to keep wringing the hearts of the living, that have as
much sense as one's self, is what I call cruel; and is not this what
Attorney Case has been doing by poor Susan and her whole family, ever
since he took a spite against them? But, at anyrate, here's Susan's lamb
safe and sound. I'd have taken it back sooner, but I was off before day
to the fair, and am but just come back. Daisy, however, has been as well
off in my paddock as he would have been in the field by the waterside." The obliging shopkeeper, who showed the pretty calicoes to Susan, was now
at his door, and when he saw the lamb, and heard that it was Susan's, and
learned its history, he said that he would add his mite; and he gave the
children some ends of narrow riband, with which Rose decorated her
friend's lamb. The pipe and tabor now once more began to play, and the procession moved
on in joyful order, after giving the humane butcher three cheers; three
cheers which were better deserved than "loud huzzas" usually are. Susan was working in her arbour, with her little deal table before her. When she heard the sound of the music, she put down her work and
listened. She saw the crowd of children coming nearer and nearer. They
had closed round Daisy, so that she did not see it; but as they came up
to the garden gate she saw that Rose beckoned to her. Philip played as
loud as he could, that she might not hear, till the proper moment, the
bleating of the lamb. Susan opened the garden-wicket, and at this signal
the crowd divided, and the first thing that Susan saw, in the midst of
her taller friends, was little smiling Mary, with the guinea-hen in her
arms. "Come on! Come on!" cried Mary, as Susan started with joyful surprise;
"you have more to see." At this instant the music paused, Susan heard the bleating of a lamb, and
scarcely daring to believe her senses, she pressed eagerly forward, and
beheld poor Daisy!--she burst into tears. "I did not shed one tear when
I parted with you, my dear little Daisy!" said she. "It was for my
father and mother. I would not have parted with you for anything else in
the whole world. Thank you, thank you all," added she, to her
companions, who sympathized in her joy, even more than they had
sympathized in her sorrow. "Now, if my father was not to go away from us
next week, and if my mother was quite stout, I should be the happiest
person in the world!" As Susan pronounced these words, a voice behind the little listening
crowd cried, in a brutal tone, "Let us pass, if you please; you have no
right to stop up the public road!" This was the voice of Attorney Case,
who was returning with his daughter Barbara from his visit to the Abbey. He saw the lamb, and tried to whistle as he went on. Barbara also saw
the guinea-hen, and turned her head another way, that she might avoid the
contemptuous, reproachful looks of those whom she only affected to
despise. Even her new bonnet, in which she had expected to be so much
admired, was now only serviceable to hide her face and conceal her
mortification. "I am glad she saw the guinea-hen," cried Rose, who now held it in her
hands. "Yes," said Philip, "she'll not forget May day in a hurry." "Nor I neither, I hope," said Susan, looking round upon her companions
with a most affectionate smile:  "I hope, whilst I live, I shall never
forget your goodness to me last May day. Now I've my pretty guinea-hen
safe once more, I should think of returning your money." "No! no! no!" was the general cry. "We don't want the money--keep it,
keep it--you want it for your father." "Well," said Susan, "I am not too proud to be obliged. I WILL keep your
money for my father. Perhaps some time or other I may be able to earn--"

"Oh," interrupted Philip, "don't let us talk of earning; don't let us
talk to her of money now; she has not had time hardly to look at poor
Daisy and her guinea-hen. Come, we must go about our business, and let
her have them all to herself." The crowd moved away in consequence of Philip's considerate advice:  but
it was observed that he was the very last to stir from the garden-wicket
himself. He stayed, first, to inform Susan that it was Rose who tied the
ribands on Daisy's head. Then he stayed a little longer to let her into
the history of the guinea-hen, and to tell her who it was that brought
the hen home from the Abbey. Rose held the sieve, and Susan was feeding her long lost favourite,
whilst Philip leaned over the wicket, prolonging his narration. "Now, my
pretty guinea-hen," said Susan--"my naughty guinea-hen, that flew away
from me, you shall never serve me so again. I must cut your nice wings;
but I won't hurt you." "Take care," cried Philip; "you'd better, indeed you'd better let me hold
her whilst you cut her wings." When this operation was successfully performed, which it certainly could
never have been if Philip had not held the hen for Susan, he recollected
that his mother had sent him with a message to Mrs. Price. This message
led to another quarter of an hour's delay; for he had the whole history
of the guinea-hen to tell over again to Mrs. Price, and the farmer
himself luckily came in whilst it was going on, so it was but civil to
begin it afresh; and then the farmer was so rejoiced to see his Susan so
happy again with her two little favourites that he declared he must see
Daisy fed himself; and Philip found that he was wanted to hold the jug
full of milk, out of which Farmer Price filled the pan for Daisy? Happy
Daisy! who lapped at his ease, whilst Susan caressed him, and thanked her
fond father and her pleased mother. "But, Philip," said Mrs. Price, "I'll hold the jug--you'll be late with
your message to your mother; we'll not detain you any longer." Philip departed, and as he went out of the garden-wicket, he looked up,
and saw Bab and her maid Betty staring out of the window, as usual. On
this, he immediately turned back to try whether he had shut the gate
fast, lest the guinea-hen might stray out, and fall again into the hands
of the enemy. Miss Barbara, in the course of this day, felt considerable mortification,
but no contrition. She was vexed that her meanness was discovered, but
she felt no desire to cure herself of any of her faults. The ball was
still uppermost in her vain, selfish soul. "Well," said she to her
confidante, Betty, "you hear how things have turned out; but if Miss
Somers won't think of asking me to go out with her, I've a notion I know
who will. As papa says, it's a good thing to have two strings to one's
bow." Now, some officers, who were quartered at Shrewsbury, had become
acquainted with Mr. Case. They had gotten into some quarrel with a
tradesman of the town, and Attorney Case had promised to bring them
through the affair, as the man threatened to take the law of them. Upon
the faith of this promise, and with the vain hope that, by civility, they
might dispose him to bring in a REASONABLE bill of costs, these officers
sometimes invited Mr. Case to the mess; and one of them, who had lately
been married, prevailed upon his bride SOMETIMES to take a little notice
of Miss Barbara. It was with this lady that Miss Barbara now hoped to go
to the harpers' ball. "The officers and Mrs. Strathspey, or, more properly, Mrs. Strathspey and
the officers, are to breakfast here, tomorrow, do you know," said Bab to
Betty. "One of them dined at the Abbey, to-day, and told papa that
they'd all come. They are going out on a party, somewhere into the
country, and breakfast here on their way. Pray, Betty, don't forget that
Mrs. Strathspey can't breakfast without honey. I heard her say so
myself." "Then, indeed," said Betty, "I'm afraid Mrs. Strathspey will be likely to
go without her breakfast here; for not a spoonful of honey have we, let
her long for it ever so much." "But, surely," said Bab, "we can contrive to get some honey in the
neighbourhood." "There's none to be bought, as I know of," said Betty. "But is there none to be begged or borrowed?" said Bab, laughing. "Do
you forget Susan's beehive? Step over to her in the morning with MY
COMPLIMENTS, and see what you can do. Tell her it's for Mrs. Strathspey." In the morning Betty went with Miss Barbara's compliments to Susan, to
beg some honey for Mrs. Strathspey, who could not breakfast without it. Susan did not like to part with her honey, because her mother loved it,
and she therefore gave Betty but a small quantity. When Barbara saw how
little Susan sent, she called her A MISER, and she said she MUST have
some more for Mrs. Strathspey. "I'll go myself and speak to her. Come
with me, Betty," said the young lady, who found it at present convenient
to forget her having declared, the day that she sucked up the broth, that
she never would honour Susan with another visit. "Susan," said she,
accosting the poor girl, whom she had done everything in her power to
injure, "I must beg a little more honey from you for Mrs. Strathspey's
breakfast. You know, on a particular occasion such as this, neighbours
must help one another." "To be sure they should," added Betty. Susan, though she was generous, was not weak; she was willing to give to
those she loved, but not disposed to let anything be taken from her, or
coaxed out of her, by those she had reason to despise. She civilly
answered, that she was sorry she had no more honey to spare. Barbara grew angry, and lost all command of herself, when she saw that
Susan, without regarding her reproaches, went on looking through the
glass pane in the beehive. "I'll tell you what, Susan Price," said she,
in a high tone, "the honey I WILL have, so you may as well give it to me
by fair means. Yes or no! Speak!