Exeunt. Thunder & Lightning

Enter Iulius Caesar in his Night-gowne. Caesar. Nor Heauen, nor Earth,
Haue beene at peace to night:
Thrice hath Calphurnia, in her sleepe cryed out,
Helpe, ho: They murther Caesar. Who's within? Enter a Seruant. Ser. My Lord

   Caes Go bid the Priests do present Sacrifice,
And bring me their opinions of Successe

   Ser. I will my Lord. Exit

Enter Calphurnia. Cal. What mean you Caesar? Think you to walk forth? You shall not stirre out of your house to day

   Caes Caesar shall forth; the things that threaten'd me,
Ne're look'd but on my backe: When they shall see
The face of Caesar, they are vanished

   Calp. Caesar, I neuer stood on Ceremonies,
Yet now they fright me: There is one within,
Besides the things that we haue heard and seene,
Recounts most horrid sights seene by the Watch. A Lionnesse hath whelped in the streets,
And Graues haue yawn'd, and yeelded vp their dead;
Fierce fiery Warriours fight vpon the Clouds
In Rankes and Squadrons, and right forme of Warre
Which drizel'd blood vpon the Capitoll:
The noise of Battell hurtled in the Ayre:
Horsses do neigh, and dying men did grone,
And Ghosts did shrieke and squeale about the streets. O Caesar, these things are beyond all vse,
And I do feare them

   Caes What can be auoyded
Whose end is purpos'd by the mighty Gods? Yet Caesar shall go forth: for these Predictions
Are to the world in generall, as to Caesar

   Calp. When Beggers dye, there are no Comets seen,
The Heauens themselues blaze forth the death of Princes
  Caes Cowards dye many times before their deaths,
The valiant neuer taste of death but once:
Of all the Wonders that I yet haue heard,
It seemes to me most strange that men should feare,
Seeing that death, a necessary end
Will come, when it will come. Enter a Seruant. What say the Augurers? Ser. They would not haue you to stirre forth to day. Plucking the intrailes of an Offering forth,
They could not finde a heart within the beast

   Caes The Gods do this in shame of Cowardice:
Caesar should be a Beast without a heart
If he should stay at home to day for feare:
No Caesar shall not; Danger knowes full well
That Caesar is more dangerous then he. We heare two Lyons litter'd in one day,
And I the elder and more terrible,
And Caesar shall go foorth

   Calp. Alas my Lord,
Your wisedome is consum'd in confidence:
Do not go forth to day: Call it my feare,
That keepes you in the house, and not your owne. Wee'l send Mark Antony to the Senate house,
And he shall say, you are not well to day:
Let me vpon my knee, preuaile in this

   Caes Mark Antony shall say I am not well,
And for thy humor, I will stay at home. Enter Decius. Heere's Decius Brutus, he shall tell them so

   Deci. Caesar, all haile: Good morrow worthy Caesar,
I come to fetch you to the Senate house

   Caes And you are come in very happy time,
To beare my greeting to the Senators,
And tell them that I will not come to day:
Cannot, is false: and that I dare not, falser:
I will not come to day, tell them so Decius

   Calp. Say he is sicke

   Caes Shall Caesar send a Lye? Haue I in Conquest stretcht mine Arme so farre,
To be afear'd to tell Gray-beards the truth:
Decius, go tell them, Caesar will not come

   Deci. Most mighty Caesar, let me know some cause,
Lest I be laught at when I tell them so

   Caes The cause is in my Will, I will not come,
That is enough to satisfie the Senate. But for your priuate satisfaction,
Because I loue you, I will let you know. Calphurnia heere my wife, stayes me at home:
She dreampt to night, she saw my Statue,
Which like a Fountaine, with an hundred spouts
Did run pure blood: and many lusty Romans
Came smiling, & did bathe their hands in it:
And these does she apply, for warnings and portents,
And euils imminent; and on her knee
Hath begg'd, that I will stay at home to day

   Deci. This Dreame is all amisse interpreted,
It was a vision, faire and fortunate:
Your Statue spouting blood in many pipes,
In which so many smiling Romans bath'd,
Signifies, that from you great Rome shall sucke
Reuiuing blood, and that great men shall presse
For Tinctures, Staines, Reliques, and Cognisance. This by Calphurnia's Dreame is signified

   Caes And this way haue you well expounded it

   Deci. I haue, when you haue heard what I can say:
And know it now, the Senate haue concluded
To giue this day, a Crowne to mighty Caesar. If you shall send them word you will not come,
Their mindes may change. Besides, it were a mocke
Apt to be render'd, for some one to say,
Breake vp the Senate, till another time:
When Caesars wife shall meete with better Dreames. If Caesar hide himselfe, shall they not whisper
Loe Caesar is affraid? Pardon me Caesar, for my deere deere loue
To your proceeding, bids me tell you this:
And reason to my loue is liable

   Caes How foolish do your fears seeme now Calphurnia? I am ashamed I did yeeld to them. Giue me my Robe, for I will go. Enter Brutus, Ligarius, Metellus, Caska, Trebonius, Cynna, and
Publius. And looke where Publius is come to fetch me

   Pub. Good morrow Caesar

   Caes Welcome Publius. What Brutus, are you stirr'd so earely too? Good morrow Caska: Caius Ligarius,
Caesar was ne're so much your enemy,
As that same Ague which hath made you leane. What is't a Clocke? Bru. Caesar, 'tis strucken eight

   Caes I thanke you for your paines and curtesie. Enter Antony. See, Antony that Reuels long a-nights
Is notwithstanding vp. Good morrow Antony

   Ant. So to most Noble Caesar

   Caes Bid them prepare within:
I am too blame to be thus waited for. Now Cynna, now Metellus: what Trebonius,
I haue an houres talke in store for you:
Remember that you call on me to day:
Be neere me, that I may remember you

   Treb. Caesar I will: and so neere will I be,
That your best Friends shall wish I had beene further

   Caes Good Friends go in, and taste some wine with me. And we (like Friends) will straight way go together

   Bru. That euery like is not the same, O Caesar,
The heart of Brutus earnes to thinke vpon. Exeunt. Enter Artemidorus. Caesar, beware of Brutus, take heede of Cassius; come not
neere Caska, haue an eye to Cynna, trust not Trebonius, marke
well Metellus Cymber, Decius Brutus loues thee not: Thou
hast wrong'd Caius Ligarius. There is but one minde in all
these men, and it is bent against Caesar: If thou beest not
Immortall,
looke about you: Security giues way to Conspiracie. The mighty Gods defend thee. Thy Louer, Artemidorus. Heere will I stand, till Caesar passe along,
And as a Sutor will I giue him this:
My heart laments, that Vertue cannot liue
Out of the teeth of Emulation. If thou reade this, O Caesar, thou mayest liue;
If not, the Fates with Traitors do contriue. Enter. Enter Portia and Lucius. Por. I prythee Boy, run to the Senate-house,
Stay not to answer me, but get thee gone. Why doest thou stay? Luc. To know my errand Madam

   Por. I would haue had thee there and heere agen
Ere I can tell thee what thou should'st do there:
O Constancie, be strong vpon my side,
Set a huge Mountaine 'tweene my Heart and Tongue:
I haue a mans minde, but a womans might:
How hard it is for women to keepe counsell. Art thou heere yet? Luc. Madam, what should I do? Run to the Capitoll, and nothing else? And so returne to you, and nothing else? Por. Yes, bring me word Boy, if thy Lord look well,
For he went sickly forth: and take good note
What Caesar doth, what Sutors presse to him. Hearke Boy, what noyse is that? Luc. I heare none Madam

   Por. Prythee listen well:
I heard a bussling Rumor like a Fray,
And the winde brings it from the Capitoll

   Luc. Sooth Madam, I heare nothing. Enter the Soothsayer. Por. Come hither Fellow, which way hast thou bin? Sooth. At mine owne house, good Lady

   Por. What is't a clocke? Sooth. About the ninth houre Lady

   Por. Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitoll? Sooth. Madam not yet, I go to take my stand,
To see him passe on to the Capitoll

   Por. Thou hast some suite to Caesar, hast thou not?