"Why, why-e-e!" said he, "I believe Buster Bear is afraid too!" Unc'
Billy Possum chuckled. "Ah believe yo' are right again, Brer Otter,"
said he. "It cert'nly does look so. If Brer Bear isn't scared, he must
have remembered something impo'tant and has gone to attend to it in a
powerful hurry." Then everybody began to laugh. XV

BUSTER BEAR IS A FALLEN HERO


A fallen hero is some one to whom every one has looked up as very brave
and then proves to be less brave than he was supposed to be. That was
the way with Buster Bear. When Little Joe Otter had told how Farmer
Brown's boy had been afraid at the mere sight of one of Buster Bear's
big footprints, they had at once made a hero of Buster. At least some of
them had. As this was the first time, the very first time, that they had
ever known any one who lives in the Green Forest to make Farmer Brown's
boy run away, they looked on Buster Bear with a great deal of respect
and were very proud of him. But now they had seen Buster Bear and Farmer Brown's boy meet face to
face; and while it was true that Farmer Brown's boy had run away as fast
as ever he could, it was also true that Buster Bear had done the same
thing. He had run even faster than Farmer Brown's boy, and had hidden in
the most lonely place he could find in the very deepest part of the
Green Forest. It was hard to believe, but it was true. And right away
everybody lost a great deal of the respect for Buster which they had
felt. It is always that way. They began to say unkind things about him. They said them among themselves, and some of them even said them to
Buster when they met him, or said them so that he would hear them. Of course Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay, who, because they can fly,
have nothing to fear from Buster, and who always delight in making other
people uncomfortable, never let a chance go by to tell Buster and
everybody else within hearing what they thought of him. They delighted
in flying about through the Green Forest until they had found Buster
Bear and then from the safety of the tree tops screaming at him. "Buster Bear is big and strong;
  His teeth are big; his claws are long;
  In spite of these he runs away
  And hides himself the livelong day!" A dozen times a day Buster would hear them screaming this. He would
grind his teeth and glare up at them, but that was all he could do. He
couldn't get at them. He just had to stand it and do nothing. But when
impudent little Chatterer the Red Squirrel shouted the same thing from
a place just out of reach in a big pine-tree, Buster could stand it no
longer. He gave a deep, angry growl that made little shivers run over
Chatterer, and then suddenly he started up that tree after Chatterer. With a frightened little shriek Chatterer scampered to the top of the
tree. He hadn't known that Buster could climb. But Buster is a splendid
climber, especially when the tree is big and stout as this one was, and
now he went up after Chatterer, growling angrily. How Chatterer did wish that he had kept his tongue still! He ran to the
very top of the tree, so frightened that his teeth chattered, and when
he looked down and saw Buster's great mouth coming nearer and nearer, he
nearly tumbled down with terror. The worst of it was there wasn't
another tree near enough for him to jump to. He was in trouble this
time, was Chatterer, sure enough! And there was no one to help him. XVI

CHATTERER THE RED SQUIRREL JUMPS FOR HIS LIFE


It isn't very often that Chatterer the Red Squirrel knows fear. That is
one reason that he is so often impudent and saucy. But once in a while a
great fear takes possession of him, as when he knows that Shadow the
Weasel is looking for him. You see, he knows that Shadow can go wherever
he can go. There are very few of the little people of the Green Forest
and the Green Meadows who do not know fear at some time or other, but it
comes to Chatterer as seldom as to any one, because he is very sure of
himself and his ability to hide or run away from danger. But now as he clung to a little branch near the top of a tall pine-tree
in the Green Forest and looked down at the big sharp teeth of Buster
Bear drawing nearer and nearer, and listened to the deep, angry growls
that made his hair stand on end, Chatterer was too frightened to think. If only he had kept his tongue still instead of saying hateful things to
Buster Bear! If only he had known that Buster could climb a tree! If
only he had chosen a tree near enough to other trees for him to jump
across! But he _had_ said hateful things, he _had_ chosen to sit in a
tree which stood quite by itself, and Buster Bear _could_ climb! Chatterer was in the worst kind of trouble, and there was no one to
blame but himself. That is usually the case with those who get into
trouble. Nearer and nearer came Buster Bear, and deeper and angrier sounded his
voice. Chatterer gave a little frightened gasp and looked this way and
looked that way. What should he do? What _could_ he do! The ground
seemed a terrible distance below. If only he had wings like Sammy Jay! But he hadn't. "Gr-r-r-r!" growled Buster Bear. "I'll teach you manners! I'll teach you
to treat your betters with respect! I'll swallow you whole, that's what
I'll do. Gr-r-r-r!" "Oh!" cried Chatterer. "Gr-r-r-r! I'll eat you all up to the last hair on your tail!" growled
Buster, scrambling a little nearer. "Oh! Oh!" cried Chatterer, and ran out to the very tip of the little
branch to which he had been clinging. Now if Chatterer had only known
it, Buster Bear couldn't reach him way up there, because the tree was
too small at the top for such a big fellow as Buster. But Chatterer
didn't think of that. He gave one more frightened look down at those big
teeth, then he shut his eyes and jumped--jumped straight out for the
far-away ground. It was a long, long, long way down to the ground, and it certainly
looked as if such a little fellow as Chatterer must be killed. But
Chatterer had learned from Old Mother Nature that she had given him
certain things to help him at just such times, and one of them is the
power to spread himself very flat. He did it now. He spread his arms and
legs out just as far as he could, and that kept him from falling as fast
and as hard as he otherwise would have done, because being spread out so
flat that way, the air held him up a little. And then there was his
tail, that funny little tail he is so fond of jerking when he scolds. This helped him too. It helped him keep his balance and keep from
turning over and over. Down, down, down he sailed and landed on his feet. Of course, he hit the
ground pretty hard, and for just a second he quite lost his breath. But
it was only for a second, and then he was scurrying off as fast as a
frightened Squirrel could. Buster Bear watched him and grinned. "I didn't catch him that time," he growled, "but I guess I gave him a
good fright and taught him a lesson." XVII

BUSTER BEAR GOES BERRYING


Buster Bear is a great hand to talk to himself when he thinks no one is
around to overhear. It's a habit. However, it isn't a bad habit unless
it is carried too far. Any habit becomes bad, if it is carried too far. Suppose you had a secret, a real secret, something that nobody else knew
and that you didn't want anybody else to know. And suppose you had the
habit of talking to yourself. You might, without thinking, you know,
tell that secret out loud to yourself, and some one might, just might
happen to overhear! Then there wouldn't be any secret. That is the way
that a habit which isn't bad in itself can become bad when it is
carried too far. Now Buster Bear had lived by himself in the Great Woods so long that
this habit of talking to himself had grown and grown. He did it just to
keep from being lonesome. Of course, when he came down to the Green
Forest to live, he brought all his habits with him. That is one thing
about habits,--you always take them with you wherever you go. So Buster
brought this habit of talking to himself down to the Green Forest, where
he had many more neighbors than he had in the Great Woods. "Let me see, let me see, what is there to tempt my appetite?" said
Buster in his deep, grumbly-rumbly voice.