Enter. Brut. The exhalations, whizzing in the ayre,
Giue so much light, that I may reade by them. Opens the Letter, and reades. Brutus thou sleep'st; awake, and see thy selfe:
Shall Rome, &c. speake, strike, redresse. Brutus, thou sleep'st: awake. Such instigations haue beene often dropt,
Where I haue tooke them vp:
Shall Rome, &c. Thus must I piece it out:
Shall Rome stand vnder one mans awe? What Rome? My Ancestors did from the streetes of Rome
The Tarquin driue, when he was call'd a King. Speake, strike, redresse. Am I entreated
To speake, and strike? O Rome, I make thee promise,
If the redresse will follow, thou receiuest
Thy full Petition at the hand of Brutus. Enter Lucius. Luc. Sir, March is wasted fifteene dayes. Knocke within. Brut. 'Tis good. Go to the Gate, some body knocks:
Since Cassius first did whet me against Caesar,
I haue not slept. Betweene the acting of a dreadfull thing,
And the first motion, all the Interim is
Like a Phantasma, or a hideous Dreame:
The Genius, and the mortall Instruments
Are then in councell; and the state of a man,
Like to a little Kingdome, suffers then
The nature of an Insurrection. Enter Lucius. Luc. Sir, 'tis your Brother Cassius at the Doore,
Who doth desire to see you

   Brut. Is he alone? Luc. No, Sir, there are moe with him

   Brut. Doe you know them? Luc. No, Sir, their Hats are pluckt about their Eares,
And halfe their Faces buried in their Cloakes,
That by no meanes I may discouer them,
By any marke of fauour

   Brut. Let 'em enter:
They are the Faction. O Conspiracie,
Sham'st thou to shew thy dang'rous Brow by Night,
When euills are most free? O then, by day
Where wilt thou finde a Cauerne darke enough,
To maske thy monstrous Visage? Seek none Conspiracie,
Hide it in Smiles, and Affabilitie:
For if thou path thy natiue semblance on,
Not Erebus it selfe were dimme enough,
To hide thee from preuention. Enter the Conspirators, Cassius, Caska, Decius, Cinna, Metellus,
and
Trebonius. Cass. I thinke we are too bold vpon your Rest:
Good morrow Brutus, doe we trouble you? Brut. I haue beene vp this howre, awake all Night:
Know I these men, that come along with you? Cass. Yes, euery man of them; and no man here
But honors you: and euery one doth wish,
You had but that opinion of your selfe,
Which euery Noble Roman beares of you. This is Trebonius

   Brut. He is welcome hither

   Cass. This, Decius Brutus

   Brut. He is welcome too

   Cass. This, Caska; this, Cinna; and this, Metellus
Cymber

   Brut. They are all welcome. What watchfull Cares doe interpose themselues
Betwixt your Eyes, and Night? Cass. Shall I entreat a word? They whisper. Decius. Here lyes the East: doth not the Day breake
heere? Cask. No

   Cin. O pardon, Sir, it doth; and yon grey Lines,
That fret the Clouds, are Messengers of Day

   Cask. You shall confesse, that you are both deceiu'd:
Heere, as I point my Sword, the Sunne arises,
Which is a great way growing on the South,
Weighing the youthfull Season of the yeare. Some two moneths hence, vp higher toward the North
He first presents his fire, and the high East
Stands as the Capitoll, directly heere

   Bru. Giue me your hands all ouer, one by one

   Cas. And let vs sweare our Resolution

   Brut. No, not an Oath: if not the Face of men,
The sufferance of our Soules, the times Abuse;
If these be Motiues weake, breake off betimes,
And euery man hence, to his idle bed:
So let high-sighted-Tyranny range on,
Till each man drop by Lottery. But if these
(As I am sure they do) beare fire enough
To kindle Cowards, and to steele with valour
The melting Spirits of women. Then Countrymen,
What neede we any spurre, but our owne cause
To pricke vs to redresse? What other Bond,
Then secret Romans, that haue spoke the word,
And will not palter? And what other Oath,
Then Honesty to Honesty ingag'd,
That this shall be, or we will fall for it. Sweare Priests and Cowards, and men Cautelous
Old feeble Carrions, and such suffering Soules
That welcome wrongs: Vnto bad causes, sweare
Such Creatures as men doubt; but do not staine
The euen vertue of our Enterprize,
Nor th' insuppressiue Mettle of our Spirits,
To thinke, that or our Cause, or our Performance
Did neede an Oath. When euery drop of blood
That euery Roman beares, and Nobly beares
Is guilty of a seuerall Bastardie,
If he do breake the smallest Particle
Of any promise that hath past from him

   Cas. But what of Cicero? Shall we sound him? I thinke he will stand very strong with vs

   Cask. Let vs not leaue him out

   Cyn. No, by no meanes

   Metel. O let vs haue him, for his Siluer haires
Will purchase vs a good opinion:
And buy mens voyces, to commend our deeds:
It shall be sayd, his iudgement rul'd our hands,
Our youths, and wildenesse, shall no whit appeare,
But all be buried in his Grauity

   Bru. O name him not; let vs not breake with him,
For he will neuer follow any thing
That other men begin

   Cas. Then leaue him out

   Cask. Indeed, he is not fit

   Decius. Shall no man else be toucht, but onely Caesar? Cas. Decius well vrg'd: I thinke it is not meet,
Marke Antony, so well belou'd of Caesar,
Should out-liue Caesar, we shall finde of him
A shrew'd Contriuer. And you know, his meanes
If he improue them, may well stretch so farre
As to annoy vs all: which to preuent,
Let Antony and Caesar fall together

   Bru. Our course will seeme too bloody, Caius Cassius,
To cut the Head off, and then hacke the Limbes:
Like Wrath in death, and Enuy afterwards:
For Antony, is but a Limbe of Caesar. Let's be Sacrificers, but not Butchers Caius:
We all stand vp against the spirit of Caesar,
And in the Spirit of men, there is no blood:
O that we then could come by Caesars Spirit,
And not dismember Caesar! But (alas)
Caesar must bleed for it. And gentle Friends,
Let's kill him Boldly, but not Wrathfully:
Let's carue him, as a Dish fit for the Gods,
Not hew him as a Carkasse fit for Hounds:
And let our Hearts, as subtle Masters do,
Stirre vp their Seruants to an acte of Rage,
And after seeme to chide 'em. This shall make
Our purpose Necessary, and not Enuious. Which so appearing to the common eyes,
We shall be call'd Purgers, not Murderers. And for Marke Antony, thinke not of him:
For he can do no more then Caesars Arme,
When Caesars head is off

   Cas. Yet I feare him,
For in the ingrafted loue he beares to Caesar

   Bru. Alas, good Cassius, do not thinke of him:
If he loue Caesar, all that he can do
Is to himselfe; take thought, and dye for Caesar,
And that were much he should: for he is giuen
To sports, to wildenesse, and much company

   Treb. There is no feare in him; let him not dye,
For he will liue, and laugh at this heereafter. Clocke strikes. Bru. Peace, count the Clocke

   Cas. The Clocke hath stricken three

   Treb. 'Tis time to part

   Cass. But it is doubtfull yet,
Whether Caesar will come forth to day, or no:
For he is Superstitious growne of late,
Quite from the maine Opinion he held once,
Of Fantasie, of Dreames, and Ceremonies:
It may be, these apparant Prodigies,
The vnaccustom'd Terror of this night,
And the perswasion of his Augurers,
May hold him from the Capitoll to day

   Decius. Neuer feare that: If he be so resolu'd,
I can ore-sway him: For he loues to heare,
That Vnicornes may be betray'd with Trees,
And Beares with Glasses, Elephants with Holes,
Lyons with Toyles, and men with Flatterers. But, when I tell him, he hates Flatterers,
He sayes, he does; being then most flattered. Let me worke:
For I can giue his humour the true bent;
And I will bring him to the Capitoll

   Cas. Nay, we will all of vs, be there to fetch him

   Bru. By the eight houre, is that the vttermost?