13:17 And Abijah and his people slew them with a great slaughter: so
there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men. 13:18 Thus the children of Israel were brought under at that time, and
the children of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon the LORD God
of their fathers. 13:19 And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him,
Bethel with the towns thereof, and Jeshanah with the towns thereof,
and Ephraim with the towns thereof. 13:20 Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of
Abijah: and the LORD struck him, and he died. 13:21 But Abijah waxed mighty, and married fourteen wives, and begat
twenty and two sons, and sixteen daughters. 13:22 And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his
sayings, are written in the story of the prophet Iddo. 14:1 So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city
of David: and Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land
was quiet ten years. 14:2 And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of the LORD
his God: 14:3 For he took away the altars of the strange gods, and the
high places, and brake down the images, and cut down the groves: 14:4
And commanded Judah to seek the LORD God of their fathers, and to do
the law and the commandment. 14:5 Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places
and the images: and the kingdom was quiet before him. 14:6 And he built fenced cities in Judah: for the land had rest, and
he had no war in those years; because the LORD had given him rest. 14:7 Therefore he said unto Judah, Let us build these cities, and make
about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars, while the land is yet
before us; because we have sought the LORD our God, we have sought
him, and he hath given us rest on every side. So they built and
prospered. 14:8 And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of
Judah three hundred thousand; and out of Benjamin, that bare shields
and drew bows, two hundred and fourscore thousand: all these were
mighty men of valour. 14:9 And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an host
of a thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots; and came unto
Mareshah. 14:10 Then Asa went out against him, and they set the battle in array
in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah. 14:11 And Asa cried unto the LORD his God, and said, LORD, it is
nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have
no power: help us, O LORD our God; for we rest on thee, and in thy
name we go against this multitude. O LORD, thou art our God; let no
man prevail against thee. 14:12 So the LORD smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah;
and the Ethiopians fled. 14:13 And Asa and the people that were with him pursued them unto
Gerar: and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover
themselves; for they were destroyed before the LORD, and before his
host; and they carried away very much spoil. 14:14 And they smote all the cities round about Gerar; for the fear of
the LORD came upon them: and they spoiled all the cities; for there
was exceeding much spoil in them. 14:15 They smote also the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep and
camels in abundance, and returned to Jerusalem. 15:1 And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded: 15:2 And
he went out to meet Asa, and said unto him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all
Judah and Benjamin; The LORD is with you, while ye be with him; and if
ye seek him, he will be found of you; but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you. 15:3 Now for a long season Israel hath been without the true God, and
without a teaching priest, and without law. 15:4 But when they in their trouble did turn unto the LORD God of
Israel, and sought him, he was found of them. 15:5 And in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor
to him that came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants
of the countries. 15:6 And nation was destroyed of nation, and city of city: for God did
vex them with all adversity. 15:7 Be ye strong therefore, and let not your hands be weak: for your
work shall be rewarded. 15:8 And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the
prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable idols out of all
the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had
taken from mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the LORD, that was
before the porch of the LORD. 15:9 And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with
them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon: for they fell to
him out of Israel in abundance, when they saw that the LORD his God
was with him. 15:10 So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third
month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa. 15:11 And they offered unto the LORD the same time, of the spoil which
they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep. 15:12 And they entered into a covenant to seek the LORD God of their
fathers with all their heart and with all their soul; 15:13 That
whosoever would not seek the LORD God of Israel should be put to
death, whether small or great, whether man or woman. 15:14 And they sware unto the LORD with a loud voice, and with
shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets. 15:15 And all Judah rejoiced at the oath: for they had sworn with all
their heart, and sought him with their whole desire; and he was found
of them: and the LORD gave them rest round about. 15:16 And also concerning Maachah the mother of Asa the king, he
removed her from being queen, because she had made an idol in a grove:
and Asa cut down her idol, and stamped it, and burnt it at the brook
Kidron. 15:17 But the high places were not taken away out of Israel:
nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days. 15:18 And he brought into the house of God the things that his father
had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold,
and vessels. 15:19 And there was no more war unto the five and thirtieth year of
the reign of Asa. 16:1 In the six and thirtieth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of
Israel came up against Judah, and built Ramah, to the intent that he
might let none go out or come in to Asa king of Judah. 16:2 Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the
house of the LORD and of the king's house, and sent to Benhadad king
of Syria, that dwelt at Damascus, saying, 16:3 There is a league
between me and thee, as there was between my father and thy father:
behold, I have sent thee silver and gold; go, break thy league with
Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me. 16:4 And Benhadad hearkened unto king Asa, and sent the captains of
his armies against the cities of Israel; and they smote Ijon, and Dan,
and Abelmaim, and all the store cities of Naphtali. 16:5 And it came to pass, when Baasha heard it, that he left off
building of Ramah, and let his work cease. 16:6 Then Asa the king took all Judah; and they carried away the
stones of Ramah, and the timber thereof, wherewith Baasha was
building; and he built therewith Geba and Mizpah. 16:7 And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and
said unto him, Because thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and not
relied on the LORD thy God, therefore is the host of the king of Syria
escaped out of thine hand. 16:8 Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, with very
many chariots and horsemen? yet, because thou didst rely on the LORD,
he delivered them into thine hand. 16:9 For the eyes of the LORD run to and fro throughout the whole
earth, to shew himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is
perfect toward him. Herein thou hast done foolishly: therefore from
henceforth thou shalt have wars. 16:10 Then Asa was wroth with the seer, and put him in a prison house;
for he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed
some of the people the same time. 16:11 And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are
written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel. 16:12 And Asa in the thirty and ninth year of his reign was diseased
in his feet, until his disease was exceeding great: yet in his disease
he sought not to the LORD, but to the physicians. 16:13 And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the one and fortieth
year of his reign. 16:14 And they buried him in his own sepulchres, which he had made for
himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled
with sweet odours and divers kinds of spices prepared by the
apothecaries' art: and they made a very great burning for him. 17:1 And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened
himself against Israel. 17:2 And he placed forces in all the fenced cities of Judah, and set
garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which
Asa his father had taken. 17:3 And the LORD was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first
ways of his father David, and sought not unto Baalim; 17:4 But sought
to the Lord God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not
after the doings of Israel. 17:5 Therefore the LORD stablished the kingdom in his hand; and all
Judah brought to Jehoshaphat presents; and he had riches and honour in
abundance. 17:6 And his heart was lifted up in the ways of the LORD: moreover he
took away the high places and groves out of Judah. 17:7 Also in the third year of his reign he sent to his princes, even
to Benhail, and to Obadiah, and to Zechariah, and to Nethaneel, and to
Michaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah. 17:8 And with them he sent Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and
Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah,
and Tobijah, and Tobadonijah, Levites; and with them Elishama and
Jehoram, priests. 17:9 And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the law of the LORD
with them, and went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and
taught the people. 17:10 And the fear of the LORD fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against
Jehoshaphat. 17:11 Also some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and
tribute silver; and the Arabians brought him flocks, seven thousand
and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he goats. 17:12 And Jehoshaphat waxed great exceedingly; and he built in Judah
castles, and cities of store. 17:13 And he had much business in the cities of Judah: and the men of
war, mighty men of valour, were in Jerusalem. 17:14 And these are the numbers of them according to the house of
their fathers: Of Judah, the captains of thousands; Adnah the chief,
and with him mighty men of valour three hundred thousand. 17:15 And next to him was Jehohanan the captain, and with him two
hundred and fourscore thousand. 17:16 And next him was Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly
offered himself unto the LORD; and with him two hundred thousand
mighty men of valour. 17:17 And of Benjamin; Eliada a mighty man of valour, and with him
armed men with bow and shield two hundred thousand. 17:18 And next him was Jehozabad, and with him an hundred and
fourscore thousand ready prepared for the war. 17:19 These waited on the king, beside those whom the king put in the
fenced cities throughout all Judah. 18:1 Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honour in abundance, and joined
affinity with Ahab. 18:2 And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab
killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people that he
had with him, and persuaded him to go up with him to Ramothgilead. 18:3 And Ahab king of Israel said unto Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Wilt
thou go with me to Ramothgilead? And he answered him, I am as thou
art, and my people as thy people; and we will be with thee in the war. 18:4 And Jehoshaphat said unto the king of Israel, Enquire, I pray
thee, at the word of the LORD to day. 18:5 Therefore the king of Israel gathered together of prophets four
hundred men, and said unto them, Shall we go to Ramothgilead to
battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up; for God will deliver
it into the king's hand. 18:6 But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of the LORD
besides, that we might enquire of him? 18:7 And the king of Israel
said unto Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man, by whom we may enquire of
the LORD: but I hate him; for he never prophesied good unto me, but
always evil: the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat
said, Let not the king say so. 18:8 And the king of Israel called for one of his officers, and said,
Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla. 18:9 And the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat king of Judah sat either
of them on his throne, clothed in their robes, and they sat in a void
place at the entering in of the gate of Samaria; and all the prophets
prophesied before them. 18:10 And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah had made him horns of iron,
and said, Thus saith the LORD, With these thou shalt push Syria until
they be consumed. 18:11 And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to
Ramothgilead, and prosper: for the LORD shall deliver it into the hand
of the king. 18:12 And the messenger that went to call Micaiah spake to him,
saying, Behold, the words of the prophets declare good to the king
with one assent; let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of
their's, and speak thou good. 18:13 And Micaiah said, As the LORD liveth, even what my God saith,
that will I speak. 18:14 And when he was come to the king, the king said unto him,
Micaiah, shall we go to Ramothgilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into
your hand. 18:15 And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee
that thou say nothing but the truth to me in the name of the LORD? 18:16 Then he said, I did see all Israel scattered upon the mountains,
as sheep that have no shepherd: and the LORD said, These have no
master; let them return therefore every man to his house in peace. 18:17 And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee
that he would not prophesy good unto me, but evil? 18:18 Again he
said, Therefore hear the word of the LORD; I saw the LORD sitting upon
his throne, and all the host of heaven standing on his right hand and
on his left. 18:19 And the LORD said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he
may go up and fall at Ramothgilead? And one spake saying after this
manner, and another saying after that manner. 18:20 Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the LORD, and
said, I will entice him. And the LORD said unto him, Wherewith?