26:3 The five curtains shall be coupled together one to another; and
other five curtains shall be coupled one to another. 26:4 And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of the one
curtain from the selvedge in the coupling; and likewise shalt thou
make in the uttermost edge of another curtain, in the coupling of the
second. 26:5 Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops
shalt thou make in the edge of the curtain that is in the coupling of
the second; that the loops may take hold one of another. 26:6 And thou shalt make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains
together with the taches: and it shall be one tabernacle. 26:7 And thou shalt make curtains of goats' hair to be a covering upon
the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make. 26:8 The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth
of one curtain four cubits: and the eleven curtains shall be all of
one measure. 26:9 And thou shalt couple five curtains by themselves, and six
curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the
forefront of the tabernacle. 26:10 And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain
that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops in the edge of the
curtain which coupleth the second. 26:11 And thou shalt make fifty taches of brass, and put the taches
into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one. 26:12 And the remnant that remaineth of the curtains of the tent, the
half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the backside of the
tabernacle. 26:13 And a cubit on the one side, and a cubit on the other side of
that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, it
shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that
side, to cover it. 26:14 And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed
red, and a covering above of badgers' skins. 26:15 And thou shalt make boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood
standing up. 26:16 Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a
half shall be the breadth of one board. 26:17 Two tenons shall there be in one board, set in order one against
another: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle. 26:18 And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards
on the south side southward. 26:19 And thou shalt make forty sockets of silver under the twenty
boards; two sockets under one board for his two tenons, and two
sockets under another board for his two tenons. 26:20 And for the second side of the tabernacle on the north side
there shall be twenty boards: 26:21 And their forty sockets of silver;
two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board. 26:22 And for the sides of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six
boards. 26:23 And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle
in the two sides. 26:24 And they shall be coupled together beneath, and they shall be
coupled together above the head of it unto one ring: thus shall it be
for them both; they shall be for the two corners. 26:25 And they shall be eight boards, and their sockets of silver,
sixteen sockets; two sockets under one board, and two sockets under
another board. 26:26 And thou shalt make bars of shittim wood; five for the boards of
the one side of the tabernacle, 26:27 And five bars for the boards of
the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the
side of the tabernacle, for the two sides westward. 26:28 And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall reach from
end to end. 26:29 And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make their
rings of gold for places for the bars: and thou shalt overlay the bars
with gold. 26:30 And thou shalt rear up the tabernacle according to the fashion
thereof which was shewed thee in the mount. 26:31 And thou shalt make a vail of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine twined linen of cunning work: with cherubims shall it be made:
26:32 And thou shalt hang it upon four pillars of shittim wood
overlaid with gold: their hooks shall be of gold, upon the four
sockets of silver. 26:33 And thou shalt hang up the vail under the taches, that thou
mayest bring in thither within the vail the ark of the testimony: and
the vail shall divide unto you between the holy place and the most
holy. 26:34 And thou shalt put the mercy seat upon the ark of the testimony
in the most holy place. 26:35 And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the
candlestick over against the table on the side of the tabernacle
toward the south: and thou shalt put the table on the north side. 26:36 And thou shalt make an hanging for the door of the tent, of
blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, wrought with
needlework. 26:37 And thou shalt make for the hanging five pillars of shittim
wood, and overlay them with gold, and their hooks shall be of gold:
and thou shalt cast five sockets of brass for them. 27:1 And thou shalt make an altar of shittim wood, five cubits long,
and five cubits broad; the altar shall be foursquare: and the height
thereof shall be three cubits. 27:2 And thou shalt make the horns of it upon the four corners
thereof: his horns shall be of the same: and thou shalt overlay it
with brass. 27:3 And thou shalt make his pans to receive his ashes, and his
shovels, and his basons, and his fleshhooks, and his firepans: all the
vessels thereof thou shalt make of brass. 27:4 And thou shalt make for it a grate of network of brass; and upon
the net shalt thou make four brasen rings in the four corners thereof. 27:5 And thou shalt put it under the compass of the altar beneath,
that the net may be even to the midst of the altar. 27:6 And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of shittim wood,
and overlay them with brass. 27:7 And the staves shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall
be upon the two sides of the altar, to bear it. 27:8 Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it was shewed thee in
the mount, so shall they make it. 27:9 And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle: for the south
side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined
linen of an hundred cubits long for one side: 27:10 And the twenty
pillars thereof and their twenty sockets shall be of brass; the hooks
of the pillars and their fillets shall be of silver. 27:11 And likewise for the north side in length there shall be
hangings of an hundred cubits long, and his twenty pillars and their
twenty sockets of brass; the hooks of the pillars and their fillets of
silver. 27:12 And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be
hangings of fifty cubits: their pillars ten, and their sockets ten. 27:13 And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be
fifty cubits. 27:14 The hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits:
their pillars three, and their sockets three. 27:15 And on the other side shall be hangings fifteen cubits: their
pillars three, and their sockets three. 27:16 And for the gate of the court shall be an hanging of twenty
cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen,
wrought with needlework: and their pillars shall be four, and their
sockets four. 27:17 All the pillars round about the court shall be filleted with
silver; their hooks shall be of silver, and their sockets of brass. 27:18 The length of the court shall be an hundred cubits, and the
breadth fifty every where, and the height five cubits of fine twined
linen, and their sockets of brass. 27:19 All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service thereof,
and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the court, shall be of
brass. 27:20 And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring
thee pure oil olive beaten for the light, to cause the lamp to burn
always. 27:21 In the tabernacle of the congregation without the vail, which is
before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall order it from evening
to morning before the LORD: it shall be a statute for ever unto their
generations on the behalf of the children of Israel. 28:1 And take thou unto thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him,
from among the children of Israel, that he may minister unto me in the
priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar,
Aaron's sons. 28:2 And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother for glory
and for beauty. 28:3 And thou shalt speak unto all that are wise hearted, whom I have
filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's garments
to consecrate him, that he may minister unto me in the priest's
office. 28:4 And these are the garments which they shall make; a breastplate,
and an ephod, and a robe, and a broidered coat, a mitre, and a girdle:
and they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons,
that he may minister unto me in the priest's office. 28:5 And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and
fine linen. 28:6 And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and of purple, of
scarlet, and fine twined linen, with cunning work. 28:7 It shall have the two shoulderpieces thereof joined at the two
edges thereof; and so it shall be joined together. 28:8 And the curious girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be
of the same, according to the work thereof; even of gold, of blue, and
purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. 28:9 And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave on them the names
of the children of Israel: 28:10 Six of their names on one stone, and
the other six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their
birth. 28:11 With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a
signet, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the
children of Israel: thou shalt make them to be set in ouches of gold. 28:12 And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulders of the
ephod for stones of memorial unto the children of Israel: and Aaron
shall bear their names before the LORD upon his two shoulders for a
memorial. 28:13 And thou shalt make ouches of gold; 28:14 And two chains of pure
gold at the ends; of wreathen work shalt thou make them, and fasten
the wreathen chains to the ouches. 28:15 And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment with cunning
work; after the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, and of fine twined linen, shalt
thou make it. 28:16 Foursquare it shall be being doubled; a span shall be the length
thereof, and a span shall be the breadth thereof. 28:17 And thou shalt set in it settings of stones, even four rows of
stones: the first row shall be a sardius, a topaz, and a carbuncle:
this shall be the first row. 28:18 And the second row shall be an emerald, a sapphire, and a
diamond. 28:19 And the third row a ligure, an agate, and an amethyst. 28:20 And the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper: they
shall be set in gold in their inclosings. 28:21 And the stones shall be with the names of the children of
Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a
signet; every one with his name shall they be according to the twelve
tribes. 28:22 And thou shalt make upon the breastplate chains at the ends of
wreathen work of pure gold. 28:23 And thou shalt make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and
shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate. 28:24 And thou shalt put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two
rings which are on the ends of the breastplate. 28:25 And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shalt
fasten in the two ouches, and put them on the shoulderpieces of the
ephod before it. 28:26 And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and thou shalt put them
upon the two ends of the breastplate in the border thereof, which is
in the side of the ephod inward. 28:27 And two other rings of gold thou shalt make, and shalt put them
on the two sides of the ephod underneath, toward the forepart thereof,
over against the other coupling thereof, above the curious girdle of
the ephod. 28:28 And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings thereof unto
the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the
curious girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed
from the ephod. 28:29 And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the
breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goeth in unto the holy
place, for a memorial before the LORD continually. 28:30 And thou shalt put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and
the Thummim; and they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goeth in
before the LORD: and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of
Israel upon his heart before the LORD continually. 28:31 And thou shalt make the robe of the ephod all of blue. 28:32 And there shall be an hole in the top of it, in the midst
thereof: it shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of
it, as it were the hole of an habergeon, that it be not rent. 28:33 And beneath upon the hem of it thou shalt make pomegranates of
blue, and of purple, and of scarlet, round about the hem thereof; and
bells of gold between them round about: 28:34 A golden bell and a
pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the hem of the robe
round about. 28:35 And it shall be upon Aaron to minister: and his sound shall be
heard when he goeth in unto the holy place before the LORD, and when
he cometh out, that he die not. 28:36 And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave upon it,
like the engravings of a signet, HOLINESS TO THE LORD. 28:37 And thou shalt put it on a blue lace, that it may be upon the
mitre; upon the forefront of the mitre it shall be. 28:38 And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, that Aaron may bear the
iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow
in all their holy gifts; and it shall be always upon his forehead,
that they may be accepted before the LORD. 28:39 And thou shalt embroider the coat of fine linen, and thou shalt
make the mitre of fine linen, and thou shalt make the girdle of
needlework. 28:40 And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make coats, and thou shalt make
for them girdles, and bonnets shalt thou make for them, for glory and
for beauty. 28:41 And thou shalt put them upon Aaron thy brother, and his sons
with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify
them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's office. 28:42 And thou shalt make them linen breeches to cover their
nakedness; from the loins even unto the thighs they shall reach: 28:43
And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they come in
unto the tabernacle of the congregation, or when they come near unto
the altar to minister in the holy place; that they bear not iniquity,
and die: it shall be a statute for ever unto him and his seed after
him. 29:1 And this is the thing that thou shalt do unto them to hallow
them, to minister unto me in the priest's office: Take one young
bullock, and two rams without blemish, 29:2 And unleavened bread, and
cakes unleavened tempered with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed
with oil: of wheaten flour shalt thou make them. 29:3 And thou shalt put them into one basket, and bring them in the
basket, with the bullock and the two rams. 29:4 And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, and shalt wash them with water. 29:5 And thou shalt take the garments, and put upon Aaron the coat,
and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and
gird him with the curious girdle of the ephod: 29:6 And thou shalt put
the mitre upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the mitre. 29:7 Then shalt thou take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his
head, and anoint him. 29:8 And thou shalt bring his sons, and put coats upon them. 29:9 And thou shalt gird them with girdles, Aaron and his sons, and
put the bonnets on them: and the priest's office shall be theirs for a
perpetual statute: and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons. 29:10 And thou shalt cause a bullock to be brought before the
tabernacle of the congregation: and Aaron and his sons shall put their
hands upon the head of the bullock. 29:11 And thou shalt kill the bullock before the LORD, by the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation.