But heere's a Parchment, with the Seale of Caesar,
I found it in his Closset, 'tis his Will:
Let but the Commons heare this Testament:
(Which pardon me) I do not meane to reade,
And they would go and kisse dead Caesars wounds,
And dip their Napkins in his Sacred Blood;
Yea, begge a haire of him for Memory,
And dying, mention it within their Willes,
Bequeathing it as a rich Legacie
Vnto their issue

   4 Wee'l heare the Will, reade it Marke Antony

   All. The Will, the Will; we will heare Caesars Will

   Ant. Haue patience gentle Friends, I must not read it. It is not meete you know how Caesar lou'd you:
You are not Wood, you are not Stones, but men:
And being men, hearing the Will of Caesar,
It will inflame you, it will make you mad:
'Tis good you know not that you are his Heires,
For if you should, O what would come of it? 4 Read the Will, wee'l heare it Antony:
You shall reade vs the Will, Caesars Will

   Ant. Will you be Patient? Will you stay a-while? I haue o're-shot my selfe to tell you of it,
I feare I wrong the Honourable men,
Whose Daggers haue stabb'd Caesar: I do feare it

   4 They were Traitors: Honourable men? All. The Will, the Testament

   2 They were Villaines, Murderers: the Will, read the
Will

   Ant. You will compell me then to read the Will:
Then make a Ring about the Corpes of Caesar,
And let me shew you him that made the Will:
Shall I descend? And will you giue me leaue? All. Come downe

   2 Descend

   3 You shall haue leaue

   4 A Ring, stand round

   1 Stand from the Hearse, stand from the Body

   2 Roome for Antony, most Noble Antony

   Ant. Nay presse not so vpon me, stand farre off

   All. Stand backe: roome, beare backe

   Ant. If you haue teares, prepare to shed them now. You all do know this Mantle, I remember
The first time euer Caesar put it on,
'Twas on a Summers Euening in his Tent,
That day he ouercame the Neruij. Looke, in this place ran Cassius Dagger through:
See what a rent the enuious Caska made:
Through this, the wel-beloued Brutus stabb'd,
And as he pluck'd his cursed Steele away:
Marke how the blood of Caesar followed it,
As rushing out of doores, to be resolu'd
If Brutus so vnkindely knock'd, or no:
For Brutus, as you know, was Caesars Angel. Iudge, O you Gods, how deerely Caesar lou'd him:
This was the most vnkindest cut of all. For when the Noble Caesar saw him stab,
Ingratitude, more strong then Traitors armes,
Quite vanquish'd him: then burst his Mighty heart,
And in his Mantle, muffling vp his face,
Euen at the Base of Pompeyes Statue
(Which all the while ran blood) great Caesar fell. O what a fall was there, my Countrymen? Then I, and you, and all of vs fell downe,
Whil'st bloody Treason flourish'd ouer vs.
O now you weepe, and I perceiue you feele
The dint of pitty: These are gracious droppes. Kinde Soules, what weepe you, when you but behold
Our Caesars Vesture wounded? Looke you heere,
Heere is Himselfe, marr'd as you see with Traitors

   1. O pitteous spectacle! 2. O Noble Caesar! 3. O wofull day! 4. O Traitors, Villaines! 1. O most bloody sight! 2. We will be reueng'd: Reuenge
About, seeke, burne, fire, kill, slay,
Let not a Traitor liue

   Ant. Stay Country-men

   1. Peace there, heare the Noble Antony

   2. Wee'l heare him, wee'l follow him, wee'l dy with
him

   Ant. Good Friends, sweet Friends, let me not stirre you vp
To such a sodaine Flood of Mutiny:
They that haue done this Deede, are honourable. What priuate greefes they haue, alas I know not,
That made them do it: They are Wise, and Honourable,
And will no doubt with Reasons answer you. I come not (Friends) to steale away your hearts,
I am no Orator, as Brutus is:
But (as you know me all) a plaine blunt man
That loue my Friend, and that they know full well,
That gaue me publike leaue to speake of him:
For I haue neyther writ nor words, nor worth,
Action, nor Vtterance, nor the power of Speech,
To stirre mens Blood. I onely speake right on:
I tell you that, which you your selues do know,
Shew you sweet Caesars wounds, poor poor dum mouths
And bid them speake for me: But were I Brutus,
And Brutus Antony, there were an Antony
Would ruffle vp your Spirits, and put a Tongue
In euery Wound of Caesar, that should moue
The stones of Rome, to rise and Mutiny

   All. Wee'l Mutiny

   1 Wee'l burne the house of Brutus

   3 Away then, come, seeke the Conspirators

   Ant. Yet heare me Countrymen, yet heare me speake
  All. Peace hoe, heare Antony, most Noble Antony

   Ant. Why Friends, you go to do you know not what:
Wherein hath Caesar thus deseru'd your loues? Alas you know not, I must tell you then:
You haue forgot the Will I told you of

   All. Most true, the Will, let's stay and heare the Wil

   Ant. Heere is the Will, and vnder Caesars Seale:
To euery Roman Citizen he giues,
To euery seuerall man, seuenty fiue Drachmaes

   2 Ple. Most Noble Caesar, wee'l reuenge his death

   3 Ple. O Royall Caesar

   Ant. Heare me with patience

   All. Peace hoe
  Ant. Moreouer, he hath left you all his Walkes,
His priuate Arbors, and new-planted Orchards,
On this side Tyber, he hath left them you,
And to your heyres for euer: common pleasures
To walke abroad, and recreate your selues. Heere was a Caesar: when comes such another? 1.Ple. Neuer, neuer: come, away, away:
Wee'l burne his body in the holy place,
And with the Brands fire the Traitors houses. Take vp the body

   2.Ple. Go fetch fire

   3.Ple. Plucke downe Benches

   4.Ple. Plucke downe Formes, Windowes, any thing. Exit Plebeians. Ant. Now let it worke: Mischeefe thou art a-foot,
Take thou what course thou wilt. How now Fellow? Enter Seruant. Ser. Sir, Octauius is already come to Rome

   Ant. Where is hee? Ser. He and Lepidus are at Caesars house

   Ant. And thither will I straight, to visit him:
He comes vpon a wish. Fortune is merry,
And in this mood will giue vs any thing

   Ser. I heard him say, Brutus and Cassius
Are rid like Madmen through the Gates of Rome

   Ant. Belike they had some notice of the people
How I had moued them. Bring me to Octauius. Exeunt. Enter Cinna the Poet, and after him the Plebeians. Cinna. I dreamt to night, that I did feast with Caesar,
And things vnluckily charge my Fantasie:
I haue no will to wander foorth of doores,
Yet something leads me foorth

   1. What is your name? 2. Whether are you going? 3. Where do you dwell? 4. Are you a married man, or a Batchellor? 2. Answer euery man directly

   1. I, and breefely

   4. I, and wisely

   3. I, and truly, you were best

   Cin. What is my name? Whether am I going? Where
do I dwell? Am I a married man, or a Batchellour? Then
to answer euery man, directly and breefely, wisely and
truly: wisely I say, I am a Batchellor

   2 That's as much as to say, they are fooles that marrie:
you'l beare me a bang for that I feare: proceede directly

   Cinna. Directly I am going to Caesars Funerall

   1. As a Friend, or an Enemy?