21:2 Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: but the LORD
pondereth the hearts. 21:3 To do justice and judgment is more acceptable to the LORD than
sacrifice. 21:4 An high look, and a proud heart, and the plowing of the wicked,
is sin. 21:5 The thoughts of the diligent tend only to plenteousness; but of
every one that is hasty only to want. 21:6 The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vanity tossed to
and fro of them that seek death. 21:7 The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them; because they refuse
to do judgment. 21:8 The way of man is froward and strange: but as for the pure, his
work is right. 21:9 It is better to dwell in a corner of the housetop, than with a
brawling woman in a wide house. 21:10 The soul of the wicked desireth evil: his neighbour findeth no
favour in his eyes. 21:11 When the scorner is punished, the simple is made wise: and when
the wise is instructed, he receiveth knowledge. 21:12 The righteous man wisely considereth the house of the wicked:
but God overthroweth the wicked for their wickedness. 21:13 Whoso stoppeth his ears at the cry of the poor, he also shall
cry himself, but shall not be heard. 21:14 A gift in secret pacifieth anger: and a reward in the bosom
strong wrath. 21:15 It is joy to the just to do judgment: but destruction shall be
to the workers of iniquity. 21:16 The man that wandereth out of the way of understanding shall
remain in the congregation of the dead. 21:17 He that loveth pleasure shall be a poor man: he that loveth wine
and oil shall not be rich. 21:18 The wicked shall be a ransom for the righteous, and the
transgressor for the upright. 21:19 It is better to dwell in the wilderness, than with a contentious
and an angry woman. 21:20 There is treasure to be desired and oil in the dwelling of the
wise; but a foolish man spendeth it up. 21:21 He that followeth after righteousness and mercy findeth life,
righteousness, and honour. 21:22 A wise man scaleth the city of the mighty, and casteth down the
strength of the confidence thereof. 21:23 Whoso keepeth his mouth and his tongue keepeth his soul from
troubles. 21:24 Proud and haughty scorner is his name, who dealeth in proud
wrath. 21:25 The desire of the slothful killeth him; for his hands refuse to
labour. 21:26 He coveteth greedily all the day long: but the righteous giveth
and spareth not. 21:27 The sacrifice of the wicked is abomination: how much more, when
he bringeth it with a wicked mind? 21:28 A false witness shall
perish: but the man that heareth speaketh constantly. 21:29 A wicked man hardeneth his face: but as for the upright, he
directeth his way. 21:30 There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against the
LORD. 21:31 The horse is prepared against the day of battle: but safety is
of the LORD. 22:1 A GOOD name is rather to be chosen than great riches, and loving
favour rather than silver and gold. 22:2 The rich and poor meet together: the LORD is the maker of them
all. 22:3 A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself: but the
simple pass on, and are punished. 22:4 By humility and the fear of the LORD are riches, and honour, and
life. 22:5 Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: he that doth
keep his soul shall be far from them. 22:6 Train up a child in the way he should go: and when he is old, he
will not depart from it. 22:7 The rich ruleth over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the
lender. 22:8 He that soweth iniquity shall reap vanity: and the rod of his
anger shall fail. 22:9 He that hath a bountiful eye shall be blessed; for he giveth of
his bread to the poor. 22:10 Cast out the scorner, and contention shall go out; yea, strife
and reproach shall cease. 22:11 He that loveth pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips the
king shall be his friend. 22:12 The eyes of the LORD preserve knowledge, and he overthroweth the
words of the transgressor. 22:13 The slothful man saith, There is a lion without, I shall be
slain in the streets. 22:14 The mouth of strange women is a deep pit: he that is abhorred of
the LORD shall fall therein. 22:15 Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child; but the rod of
correction shall drive it far from him. 22:16 He that oppresseth the poor to increase his riches, and he that
giveth to the rich, shall surely come to want. 22:17 Bow down thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply
thine heart unto my knowledge. 22:18 For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee; they
shall withal be fitted in thy lips. 22:19 That thy trust may be in the LORD, I have made known to thee
this day, even to thee. 22:20 Have not I written to thee excellent things in counsels and
knowledge, 22:21 That I might make thee know the certainty of the
words of truth; that thou mightest answer the words of truth to them
that send unto thee? 22:22 Rob not the poor, because he is poor:
neither oppress the afflicted in the gate: 22:23 For the LORD will
plead their cause, and spoil the soul of those that spoiled them. 22:24 Make no friendship with an angry man; and with a furious man
thou shalt not go: 22:25 Lest thou learn his ways, and get a snare to
thy soul. 22:26 Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that are
sureties for debts. 22:27 If thou hast nothing to pay, why should he take away thy bed
from under thee? 22:28 Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy
fathers have set. 22:29 Seest thou a man diligent in his business? he shall stand before
kings; he shall not stand before mean men. 23:1 When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what
is before thee: 23:2 And put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man
given to appetite. 23:3 Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat. 23:4 Labour not to be rich: cease from thine own wisdom. 23:5 Wilt thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? for riches
certainly make themselves wings; they fly away as an eagle toward
heaven. 23:6 Eat thou not the bread of him that hath an evil eye, neither
desire thou his dainty meats: 23:7 For as he thinketh in his heart, so
is he: Eat and drink, saith he to thee; but his heart is not with
thee. 23:8 The morsel which thou hast eaten shalt thou vomit up, and lose
thy sweet words. 23:9 Speak not in the ears of a fool: for he will despise the wisdom
of thy words. 23:10 Remove not the old landmark; and enter not into the fields of
the fatherless: 23:11 For their redeemer is mighty; he shall plead
their cause with thee. 23:12 Apply thine heart unto instruction, and thine ears to the words
of knowledge. 23:13 Withhold not correction from the child: for if thou beatest him
with the rod, he shall not die. 23:14 Thou shalt beat him with the rod, and shalt deliver his soul
from hell. 23:15 My son, if thine heart be wise, my heart shall rejoice, even
mine. 23:16 Yea, my reins shall rejoice, when thy lips speak right things. 23:17 Let not thine heart envy sinners: but be thou in the fear of the
LORD all the day long. 23:18 For surely there is an end; and thine expectation shall not be
cut off. 23:19 Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thine heart in the
way. 23:20 Be not among winebibbers; among riotous eaters of flesh: 23:21
For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty: and drowsiness
shall clothe a man with rags. 23:22 Hearken unto thy father that begat thee, and despise not thy
mother when she is old. 23:23 Buy the truth, and sell it not; also wisdom, and instruction,
and understanding. 23:24 The father of the righteous shall greatly rejoice: and he that
begetteth a wise child shall have joy of him. 23:25 Thy father and thy mother shall be glad, and she that bare thee
shall rejoice. 23:26 My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways. 23:27 For a whore is a deep ditch; and a strange woman is a narrow
pit. 23:28 She also lieth in wait as for a prey, and increaseth the
transgressors among men. 23:29 Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath
babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes? 23:30 They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed
wine. 23:31 Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his
colour in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. 23:32 At the last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an
adder. 23:33 Thine eyes shall behold strange women, and thine heart shall
utter perverse things. 23:34 Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the
sea, or as he that lieth upon the top of a mast. 23:35 They have stricken me, shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they
have beaten me, and I felt it not: when shall I awake? I will seek it
yet again. 24:1 Be not thou envious against evil men, neither desire to be with
them. 24:2 For their heart studieth destruction, and their lips talk of
mischief. 24:3 Through wisdom is an house builded; and by understanding it is
established: 24:4 And by knowledge shall the chambers be filled with
all precious and pleasant riches. 24:5 A wise man is strong; yea, a man of knowledge increaseth
strength. 24:6 For by wise counsel thou shalt make thy war: and in multitude of
counsellors there is safety. 24:7 Wisdom is too high for a fool: he openeth not his mouth in the
gate. 24:8 He that deviseth to do evil shall be called a mischievous person. 24:9 The thought of foolishness is sin: and the scorner is an
abomination to men. 24:10 If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small. 24:11 If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and
those that are ready to be slain; 24:12 If thou sayest, Behold, we
knew it not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he
that keepeth thy soul, doth not he know it? and shall not he render to
every man according to his works? 24:13 My son, eat thou honey,
because it is good; and the honeycomb, which is sweet to thy taste:
24:14 So shall the knowledge of wisdom be unto thy soul: when thou
hast found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy expectation shall
not be cut off. 24:15 Lay not wait, O wicked man, against the dwelling of the
righteous; spoil not his resting place: 24:16 For a just man falleth
seven times, and riseth up again: but the wicked shall fall into
mischief. 24:17 Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let not thine heart be
glad when he stumbleth: 24:18 Lest the LORD see it, and it displease
him, and he turn away his wrath from him. 24:19 Fret not thyself because of evil men, neither be thou envious at
the wicked: 24:20 For there shall be no reward to the evil man; the
candle of the wicked shall be put out. 24:21 My son, fear thou the LORD and the king: and meddle not with
them that are given to change: 24:22 For their calamity shall rise
suddenly; and who knoweth the ruin of them both? 24:23 These things
also belong to the wise. It is not good to have respect of persons in
judgment. 24:24 He that saith unto the wicked, Thou are righteous; him shall the
people curse, nations shall abhor him: 24:25 But to them that rebuke
him shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them. 24:26 Every man shall kiss his lips that giveth a right answer. 24:27 Prepare thy work without, and make it fit for thyself in the
field; and afterwards build thine house. 24:28 Be not a witness against thy neighbour without cause; and
deceive not with thy lips. 24:29 Say not, I will do so to him as he hath done to me: I will
render to the man according to his work. 24:30 I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the
man void of understanding; 24:31 And, lo, it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall
thereof was broken down. 24:32 Then I saw, and considered it well: I looked upon it, and
received instruction. 24:33 Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep: 24:34 So shall thy poverty come as one that
travelleth; and thy want as an armed man. 25:1 These are also proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah
king of Judah copied out. 25:2 It is the glory of God to conceal a thing: but the honour of
kings is to search out a matter. 25:3 The heaven for height, and the earth for depth, and the heart of
kings is unsearchable. 25:4 Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a
vessel for the finer. 25:5 Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall
be established in righteousness. 25:6 Put not forth thyself in the presence of the king, and stand not
in the place of great men: 25:7 For better it is that it be said unto
thee, Come up hither; than that thou shouldest be put lower in the
presence of the prince whom thine eyes have seen. 25:8 Go not forth hastily to strive, lest thou know not what to do in
the end thereof, when thy neighbour hath put thee to shame. 25:9 Debate thy cause with thy neighbour himself; and discover not a
secret to another: 25:10 Lest he that heareth it put thee to shame,
and thine infamy turn not away. 25:11 A word fitly spoken is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver. 25:12 As an earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, so is a
wise reprover upon an obedient ear. 25:13 As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, so is a faithful
messenger to them that send him: for he refresheth the soul of his
masters. 25:14 Whoso boasteth himself of a false gift is like clouds and wind
without rain. 25:15 By long forbearing is a prince persuaded, and a soft tongue
breaketh the bone. 25:16 Hast thou found honey? eat so much as is sufficient for thee,
lest thou be filled therewith, and vomit it. 25:17 Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbour's house; lest he be weary
of thee, and so hate thee. 25:18 A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour is a
maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow. 25:19 Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is like a
broken tooth, and a foot out of joint. 25:20 As he that taketh away a garment in cold weather, and as vinegar
upon nitre, so is he that singeth songs to an heavy heart. 25:21 If thine enemy be hungry, give him bread to eat; and if he be
thirsty, give him water to drink: 25:22 For thou shalt heap coals of
fire upon his head, and the LORD shall reward thee. 25:23 The north wind driveth away rain: so doth an angry countenance a
backbiting tongue. 25:24 It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a
brawling woman and in a wide house. 25:25 As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far
country. 25:26 A righteous man falling down before the wicked is as a troubled
fountain, and a corrupt spring. 25:27 It is not good to eat much honey: so for men to search their own
glory is not glory. 25:28 He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is
broken down, and without walls. 26:1 As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honour is not
seemly for a fool. 26:2 As the bird by wandering, as the swallow by flying, so the curse
causeless shall not come. 26:3 A whip for the horse, a bridle for the ass, and a rod for the
fool's back. 26:4 Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like
unto him. 26:5 Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own
conceit. 26:6 He that sendeth a message by the hand of a fool cutteth off the
feet, and drinketh damage. 26:7 The legs of the lame are not equal: so is a parable in the mouth
of fools. 26:8 As he that bindeth a stone in a sling, so is he that giveth
honour to a fool. 26:9 As a thorn goeth up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a parable
in the mouths of fools. 26:10 The great God that formed all things both rewardeth the fool,
and rewardeth transgressors. 26:11 As a dog returneth to his vomit, so a fool returneth to his
folly. 26:12 Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of
a fool than of him. 26:13 The slothful man saith, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in
the streets. 26:14 As the door turneth upon his hinges, so doth the slothful upon
his bed. 26:15 The slothful hideth his hand in his bosom; it grieveth him to
bring it again to his mouth. 26:16 The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men that can
render a reason. 26:17 He that passeth by, and meddleth with strife belonging not to
him, is like one that taketh a dog by the ears. 26:18 As a mad man who casteth firebrands, arrows, and death, 26:19 So
is the man that deceiveth his neighbour, and saith, Am not I in sport? 26:20 Where no wood is, there the fire goeth out: so where there is no
talebearer, the strife ceaseth. 26:21 As coals are to burning coals, and wood to fire; so is a
contentious man to kindle strife. 26:22 The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into
the innermost parts of the belly. 26:23 Burning lips and a wicked heart are like a potsherd covered with
silver dross. 26:24 He that hateth dissembleth with his lips, and layeth up deceit
within him; 26:25 When he speaketh fair, believe him not: for there
are seven abominations in his heart. 26:26 Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his wickedness shall be
shewed before the whole congregation. 26:27 Whoso diggeth a pit shall fall therein: and he that rolleth a
stone, it will return upon him. 26:28 A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted by it; and a
flattering mouth worketh ruin. 27:1 Boast not thyself of to morrow; for thou knowest not what a day
may bring forth. 27:2 Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth; a stranger,
and not thine own lips. 27:3 A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty; but a fool's wrath is
heavier than them both. 27:4 Wrath is cruel, and anger is outrageous; but who is able to stand
before envy? 27:5 Open rebuke is better than secret love. 27:6 Faithful are the wounds of a friend; but the kisses of an enemy
are deceitful. 27:7 The full soul loatheth an honeycomb; but to the hungry soul every
bitter thing is sweet. 27:8 As a bird that wandereth from her nest, so is a man that
wandereth from his place. 27:9 Ointment and perfume rejoice the heart: so doth the sweetness of
a man's friend by hearty counsel. 27:10 Thine own friend, and thy father's friend, forsake not; neither
go into thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity: for better is
a neighbour that is near than a brother far off. 27:11 My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him
that reproacheth me. 27:12 A prudent man foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself; but the
simple pass on, and are punished. 27:13 Take his garment that is surety for a stranger, and take a
pledge of him for a strange woman. 27:14 He that blesseth his friend with a loud voice, rising early in
the morning, it shall be counted a curse to him. 27:15 A continual dropping in a very rainy day and a contentious woman
are alike. 27:16 Whosoever hideth her hideth the wind, and the ointment of his
right hand, which bewrayeth itself. 27:17 Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his
friend. 27:18 Whoso keepeth the fig tree shall eat the fruit thereof: so he
that waiteth on his master shall be honoured. 27:19 As in water face answereth to face, so the heart of man to man. 27:20 Hell and destruction are never full; so the eyes of man are
never satisfied. 27:21 As the fining pot for silver, and the furnace for gold; so is a
man to his praise. 27:22 Though thou shouldest bray a fool in a mortar among wheat with a
pestle, yet will not his foolishness depart from him. 27:23 Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well
to thy herds. 27:24 For riches are not for ever: and doth the crown endure to every
generation? 27:25 The hay appeareth, and the tender grass sheweth
itself, and herbs of the mountains are gathered. 27:26 The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the price of
the field. 27:27 And thou shalt have goats' milk enough for thy food, for the
food of thy household, and for the maintenance for thy maidens. 28:1 The wicked flee when no man pursueth: but the righteous are bold
as a lion. 28:2 For the transgression of a land many are the princes thereof: but
by a man of understanding and knowledge the state thereof shall be
prolonged. 28:3 A poor man that oppresseth the poor is like a sweeping rain which
leaveth no food. 28:4 They that forsake the law praise the wicked: but such as keep the
law contend with them. 28:5 Evil men understand not judgment: but they that seek the LORD
understand all things. 28:6 Better is the poor that walketh in his uprightness, than he that
is perverse in his ways, though he be rich. 28:7 Whoso keepeth the law is a wise son: but he that is a companion
of riotous men shameth his father. 28:8 He that by usury and unjust gain increaseth his substance, he
shall gather it for him that will pity the poor. 28:9 He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his
prayer shall be abomination. 28:10 Whoso causeth the righteous to go astray in an evil way, he
shall fall himself into his own pit: but the upright shall have good
things in possession. 28:11 The rich man is wise in his own conceit; but the poor that hath
understanding searcheth him out. 28:12 When righteous men do rejoice, there is great glory: but when
the wicked rise, a man is hidden. 28:13 He that covereth his sins shall not prosper: but whoso
confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy. 28:14 Happy is the man that feareth alway: but he that hardeneth his
heart shall fall into mischief. 28:15 As a roaring lion, and a ranging bear; so is a wicked ruler over
the poor people. 28:16 The prince that wanteth understanding is also a great oppressor:
but he that hateth covetousness shall prolong his days. 28:17 A man that doeth violence to the blood of any person shall flee
to the pit; let no man stay him. 28:18 Whoso walketh uprightly shall be saved: but he that is perverse
in his ways shall fall at once. 28:19 He that tilleth his land shall have plenty of bread: but he that
followeth after vain persons shall have poverty enough. 28:20 A faithful man shall abound with blessings: but he that maketh
haste to be rich shall not be innocent. 28:21 To have respect of persons is not good: for for a piece of bread
that man will transgress. 28:22 He that hasteth to be rich hath an evil eye, and considereth not
that poverty shall come upon him. 28:23 He that rebuketh a man afterwards shall find more favour than he
that flattereth with the tongue. 28:24 Whoso robbeth his father or his mother, and saith, It is no
transgression; the same is the companion of a destroyer. 28:25 He that is of a proud heart stirreth up strife: but he that
putteth his trust in the LORD shall be made fat. 28:26 He that trusteth in his own heart is a fool: but whoso walketh
wisely, he shall be delivered. 28:27 He that giveth unto the poor shall not lack: but he that hideth
his eyes shall have many a curse. 28:28 When the wicked rise, men hide themselves: but when they perish,
the righteous increase. 29:1 He, that being often reproved hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly
be destroyed, and that without remedy. 29:2 When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice: but when
the wicked beareth rule, the people mourn. 29:3 Whoso loveth wisdom rejoiceth his father: but he that keepeth
company with harlots spendeth his substance. 29:4 The king by judgment establisheth the land: but he that receiveth
gifts overthroweth it. 29:5 A man that flattereth his neighbour spreadeth a net for his feet. 29:6 In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare: but the
righteous doth sing and rejoice. 29:7 The righteous considereth the cause of the poor: but the wicked
regardeth not to know it. 29:8 Scornful men bring a city into a snare: but wise men turn away
wrath. 29:9 If a wise man contendeth with a foolish man, whether he rage or
laugh, there is no rest. 29:10 The bloodthirsty hate the upright: but the just seek his soul. 29:11 A fool uttereth all his mind: but a wise man keepeth it in till
afterwards. 29:12 If a ruler hearken to lies, all his servants are wicked. 29:13 The poor and the deceitful man meet together: the LORD
lighteneth both their eyes. 29:14 The king that faithfully judgeth the poor, his throne shall be
established for ever. 29:15 The rod and reproof give wisdom: but a child left to himself
bringeth his mother to shame. 29:16 When the wicked are multiplied, transgression increaseth: but
the righteous shall see their fall. 29:17 Correct thy son, and he shall give thee rest; yea, he shall give
delight unto thy soul. 29:18 Where there is no vision, the people perish: but he that keepeth
the law, happy is he. 29:19 A servant will not be corrected by words: for though he
understand he will not answer. 29:20 Seest thou a man that is hasty in his words? there is more hope
of a fool than of him. 29:21 He that delicately bringeth up his servant from a child shall
have him become his son at the length. 29:22 An angry man stirreth up strife, and a furious man aboundeth in
transgression. 29:23 A man's pride shall bring him low: but honour shall uphold the
humble in spirit. 29:24 Whoso is partner with a thief hateth his own soul: he heareth
cursing, and bewrayeth it not. 29:25 The fear of man bringeth a snare: but whoso putteth his trust in
the LORD shall be safe. 29:26 Many seek the ruler's favour; but every man's judgment cometh
from the LORD. 29:27 An unjust man is an abomination to the just: and he that is
upright in the way is abomination to the wicked. 30:1 The words of Agur the son of Jakeh, even the prophecy: the man
spake unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal, 30:2 Surely I am more
brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man. 30:3 I neither learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the holy. 30:4 Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended? who hath gathered
the wind in his fists? who hath bound the waters in a garment? who
hath established all the ends of the earth? what is his name, and what
is his son's name, if thou canst tell? 30:5 Every word of God is
pure: he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him. 30:6 Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be
found a liar. 30:7 Two things have I required of thee; deny me them not before I
die: 30:8 Remove far from me vanity and lies: give me neither poverty
nor riches; feed me with food convenient for me: 30:9 Lest I be full,
and deny thee, and say, Who is the LORD? or lest I be poor, and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain. 30:10 Accuse not a servant unto his master, lest he curse thee, and
thou be found guilty. 30:11 There is a generation that curseth their father, and doth not
bless their mother. 30:12 There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes, and yet
is not washed from their filthiness. 30:13 There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their
eyelids are lifted up. 30:14 There is a generation, whose teeth are as swords, and their jaw
teeth as knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy
from among men. 30:15 The horseleach hath two daughters, crying, Give, give. There are
three things that are never satisfied, yea, four things say not, It is
enough: 30:16 The grave; and the barren womb; the earth that is not
filled with water; and the fire that saith not, It is enough. 30:17 The eye that mocketh at his father, and despiseth to obey his
mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young
eagles shall eat it. 30:18 There be three things which are too wonderful for me, yea, four
which I know not: 30:19 The way of an eagle in the air; the way of a
serpent upon a rock; the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; and
the way of a man with a maid. 30:20 Such is the way of an adulterous woman; she eateth, and wipeth
her mouth, and saith, I have done no wickedness. 30:21 For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it
cannot bear: 30:22 For a servant when he reigneth; and a fool when he
is filled with meat; 30:23 For an odious woman when she is married;
and an handmaid that is heir to her mistress. 30:24 There be four things which are little upon the earth, but they
are exceeding wise: 30:25 The ants are a people not strong, yet they
prepare their meat in the summer; 30:26 The conies are but a feeble
folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks; 30:27 The locusts have
no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands; 30:28 The spider
taketh hold with her hands, and is in kings' palaces. 30:29 There be three things which go well, yea, four are comely in
going: 30:30 A lion which is strongest among beasts, and turneth not
away for any; 30:31 A greyhound; an he goat also; and a king, against
whom there is no rising up. 30:32 If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou
hast thought evil, lay thine hand upon thy mouth. 30:33 Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter, and the
wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: so the forcing of wrath
bringeth forth strife. 31:1 The words of king Lemuel, the prophecy that his mother taught
him. 31:2 What, my son? and what, the son of my womb? and what, the son of
my vows? 31:3 Give not thy strength unto women, nor thy ways to that
which destroyeth kings. 31:4 It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine;
nor for princes strong drink: 31:5 Lest they drink, and forget the
law, and pervert the judgment of any of the afflicted. 31:6 Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto
those that be of heavy hearts. 31:7 Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and remember his misery no
more. 31:8 Open thy mouth for the dumb in the cause of all such as are
appointed to destruction. 31:9 Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and plead the cause of the
poor and needy. 31:10 Who can find a virtuous woman? for her price is far above
rubies. 31:11 The heart of her husband doth safely trust in her, so that he
shall have no need of spoil. 31:12 She will do him good and not evil all the days of her life. 31:13 She seeketh wool, and flax, and worketh willingly with her
hands. 31:14 She is like the merchants' ships; she bringeth her food from
afar. 31:15 She riseth also while it is yet night, and giveth meat to her
household, and a portion to her maidens. 31:16 She considereth a field, and buyeth it: with the fruit of her
hands she planteth a vineyard. 31:17 She girdeth her loins with strength, and strengtheneth her arms. 31:18 She perceiveth that her merchandise is good: her candle goeth
not out by night. 31:19 She layeth her hands to the spindle, and her hands hold the
distaff. 31:20 She stretcheth out her hand to the poor; yea, she reacheth forth
her hands to the needy. 31:21 She is not afraid of the snow for her household: for all her
household are clothed with scarlet. 31:22 She maketh herself coverings of tapestry; her clothing is silk
and purple. 31:23 Her husband is known in the gates, when he sitteth among the
elders of the land. 31:24 She maketh fine linen, and selleth it; and delivereth girdles
unto the merchant. 31:25 Strength and honour are her clothing; and she shall rejoice in
time to come. 31:26 She openeth her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law
of kindness. 31:27 She looketh well to the ways of her household, and eateth not
the bread of idleness. 31:28 Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also,
and he praiseth her. 31:29 Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them
all. 31:30 Favour is deceitful, and beauty is vain: but a woman that
feareth the LORD, she shall be praised. 31:31 Give her of the fruit of her hands; and let her own works praise
her in the gates. Ecclesiastes

or

The Preacher


1:1 The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem. 1:2 Vanity of vanities, saith the Preacher, vanity of vanities; all is
vanity. 1:3 What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh under the
sun? 1:4 One generation passeth away, and another generation cometh:
but the earth abideth for ever. 1:5 The sun also ariseth, and the sun goeth down, and hasteth to his
place where he arose. 1:6 The wind goeth toward the south, and turneth about unto the north;
it whirleth about continually, and the wind returneth again according
to his circuits. 1:7 All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not full; unto the
place from whence the rivers come, thither they return again. 1:8 All things are full of labour; man cannot utter it: the eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. 1:9 The thing that hath been, it is that which shall be; and that
which is done is that which shall be done: and there is no new thing
under the sun. 1:10 Is there any thing whereof it may be said, See, this is new? it
hath been already of old time, which was before us. 1:11 There is no remembrance of former things; neither shall there be
any remembrance of things that are to come with those that shall come
after. 1:12 I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem. 1:13 And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom concerning
all things that are done under heaven: this sore travail hath God
given to the sons of man to be exercised therewith. 1:14 I have seen all the works that are done under the sun; and,
behold, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. 1:15 That which is crooked cannot be made straight: and that which is
wanting cannot be numbered. 1:16 I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to great
estate, and have gotten more wisdom than all they that have been
before me in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom
and knowledge. 1:17 And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and
folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit. 1:18 For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increaseth
knowledge increaseth sorrow. 2:1 I said in mine heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
therefore enjoy pleasure: and, behold, this also is vanity. 2:2 I said of laughter, It is mad: and of mirth, What doeth it? 2:3 I
sought in mine heart to give myself unto wine, yet acquainting mine
heart with wisdom; and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was
that good for the sons of men, which they should do under the heaven
all the days of their life. 2:4 I made me great works; I builded me houses; I planted me
vineyards: 2:5 I made me gardens and orchards, and I planted trees in
them of all kind of fruits: 2:6 I made me pools of water, to water
therewith the wood that bringeth forth trees: 2:7 I got me servants
and maidens, and had servants born in my house; also I had great
possessions of great and small cattle above all that were in Jerusalem
before me: 2:8 I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar
treasure of kings and of the provinces: I gat me men singers and women
singers, and the delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments,
and that of all sorts. 2:9 So I was great, and increased more than all that were before me in
Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me. 2:10 And whatsoever mine eyes desired I kept not from them, I withheld
not my heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labour: and
this was my portion of all my labour. 2:11 Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on
the labour that I had laboured to do: and, behold, all was vanity and
vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the sun. 2:12 And I turned myself to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly: for
what can the man do that cometh after the king? even that which hath
been already done. 2:13 Then I saw that wisdom excelleth folly, as far as light excelleth
darkness. 2:14 The wise man's eyes are in his head; but the fool walketh in
darkness: and I myself perceived also that one event happeneth to them
all. 2:15 Then said I in my heart, As it happeneth to the fool, so it
happeneth even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my
heart, that this also is vanity. 2:16 For there is no remembrance of the wise more than of the fool for
ever; seeing that which now is in the days to come shall all be
forgotten. And how dieth the wise man? as the fool. 2:17 Therefore I hated life; because the work that is wrought under
the sun is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit. 2:18 Yea, I hated all my labour which I had taken under the sun:
because I should leave it unto the man that shall be after me. 2:19 And who knoweth whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet
shall he have rule over all my labour wherein I have laboured, and
wherein I have shewed myself wise under the sun. This is also vanity. 2:20 Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the
labour which I took under the sun. 2:21 For there is a man whose labour is in wisdom, and in knowledge,
and in equity; yet to a man that hath not laboured therein shall he
leave it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil. 2:22 For what hath man of all his labour, and of the vexation of his
heart, wherein he hath laboured under the sun? 2:23 For all his days
are sorrows, and his travail grief; yea, his heart taketh not rest in
the night. This is also vanity. 2:24 There is nothing better for a man, than that he should eat and
drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy good in his labour. This
also I saw, that it was from the hand of God. 2:25 For who can eat, or who else can hasten hereunto, more than I? 2:26 For God giveth to a man that is good in his sight wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he giveth travail, to gather and
to heap up, that he may give to him that is good before God. This also
is vanity and vexation of spirit. 3:1 To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under the heaven: 3:2 A time to be born, and a time to die; a time to
plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; 3:3 A time to
kill, and a time to heal; a time to break down, and a time to build
up; 3:4 A time to weep, and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a
time to dance; 3:5 A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather
stones together; a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from
embracing; 3:6 A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and
a time to cast away; 3:7 A time to rend, and a time to sew; a time to
keep silence, and a time to speak; 3:8 A time to love, and a time to
hate; a time of war, and a time of peace. 3:9 What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth? 3:10 I have seen the travail, which God hath given to the sons of men
to be exercised in it. 3:11 He hath made every thing beautiful in his time: also he hath set
the world in their heart, so that no man can find out the work that
God maketh from the beginning to the end. 3:12 I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice,
and to do good in his life. 3:13 And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy the good
of all his labour, it is the gift of God. 3:14 I know that, whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever: nothing
can be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God doeth it, that
men should fear before him. 3:15 That which hath been is now; and that which is to be hath already
been; and God requireth that which is past. 3:16 And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment, that
wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity
was there. 3:17 I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the
wicked: for there is a time there for every purpose and for every
work. 3:18 I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men,
that God might manifest them, and that they might see that they
themselves are beasts. 3:19 For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts; even
one thing befalleth them: as the one dieth, so dieth the other; yea,
they have all one breath; so that a man hath no preeminence above a
beast: for all is vanity. 3:20 All go unto one place; all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
again. 3:21 Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward, and the spirit
of the beast that goeth downward to the earth? 3:22 Wherefore I
perceive that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice
in his own works; for that is his portion: for who shall bring him to
see what shall be after him? 4:1 So I returned, and considered all
the oppressions that are done under the sun: and behold the tears of
such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of
their oppressors there was power; but they had no comforter. 4:2 Wherefore I praised the dead which are already dead more than the
living which are yet alive. 4:3 Yea, better is he than both they, which hath not yet been, who
hath not seen the evil work that is done under the sun. 4:4 Again, I considered all travail, and every right work, that for
this a man is envied of his neighbour. This is also vanity and
vexation of spirit. 4:5 The fool foldeth his hands together, and eateth his own flesh. 4:6 Better is an handful with quietness, than both the hands full with
travail and vexation of spirit. 4:7 Then I returned, and I saw vanity under the sun. 4:8 There is one alone, and there is not a second; yea, he hath
neither child nor brother: yet is there no end of all his labour;
neither is his eye satisfied with riches; neither saith he, For whom
do I labour, and bereave my soul of good? This is also vanity, yea, it
is a sore travail. 4:9 Two are better than one; because they have a good reward for their
labour. 4:10 For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him
that is alone when he falleth; for he hath not another to help him up. 4:11 Again, if two lie together, then they have heat: but how can one
be warm alone? 4:12 And if one prevail against him, two shall
withstand him; and a threefold cord is not quickly broken. 4:13 Better is a poor and a wise child than an old and foolish king,
who will no more be admonished. 4:14 For out of prison he cometh to reign; whereas also he that is
born in his kingdom becometh poor. 4:15 I considered all the living which walk under the sun, with the
second child that shall stand up in his stead. 4:16 There is no end of all the people, even of all that have been
before them: they also that come after shall not rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and vexation of spirit. 5:1 Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God, and be more
ready to hear, than to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider
not that they do evil. 5:2 Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth:
therefore let thy words be few. 5:3 For a dream cometh through the multitude of business; and a fool's
voice is known by multitude of words. 5:4 When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath
no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed. 5:5 Better is it that thou shouldest not vow, than that thou shouldest
vow and not pay. 5:6 Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin; neither say thou
before the angel, that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry
at thy voice, and destroy the work of thine hands? 5:7 For in the
multitude of dreams and many words there are also divers vanities: but
fear thou God. 5:8 If thou seest the oppression of the poor, and violent perverting
of judgment and justice in a province, marvel not at the matter: for
he that is higher than the highest regardeth; and there be higher than
they. 5:9 Moreover the profit of the earth is for all: the king himself is
served by the field. 5:10 He that loveth silver shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he
that loveth abundance with increase: this is also vanity. 5:11 When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what
good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with
their eyes? 5:12 The sleep of a labouring man is sweet, whether he
eat little or much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him
to sleep. 5:13 There is a sore evil which I have seen under the sun, namely,
riches kept for the owners thereof to their hurt. 5:14 But those riches perish by evil travail: and he begetteth a son,
and there is nothing in his hand. 5:15 As he came forth of his mother's womb, naked shall he return to
go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labour, which he may
carry away in his hand. 5:16 And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so
shall he go: and what profit hath he that hath laboured for the wind? 5:17 All his days also he eateth in darkness, and he hath much sorrow
and wrath with his sickness. 5:18 Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely for one to
eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labour that he
taketh under the sun all the days of his life, which God giveth him:
for it is his portion. 5:19 Every man also to whom God hath given riches and wealth, and hath
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to
rejoice in his labour; this is the gift of God. 5:20 For he shall not much remember the days of his life; because God
answereth him in the joy of his heart. 6:1 There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and it is common
among men: 6:2 A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and
honour, so that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he
desireth, yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof, but a stranger
eateth it: this is vanity, and it is an evil disease. 6:3 If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that
the days of his years be many, and his soul be not filled with good,
and also that he have no burial; I say, that an untimely birth is
better than he. 6:4 For he cometh in with vanity, and departeth in darkness, and his
name shall be covered with darkness. 6:5 Moreover he hath not seen the sun, nor known any thing: this hath
more rest than the other. 6:6 Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet hath he seen
no good: do not all go to one place? 6:7 All the labour of man is for
his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled. 6:8 For what hath the wise more than the fool? what hath the poor,
that knoweth to walk before the living? 6:9 Better is the sight of
the eyes than the wandering of the desire: this is also vanity and
vexation of spirit. 6:10 That which hath been is named already, and it is known that it is
man: neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he. 6:11 Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man the
better? 6:12 For who knoweth what is good for man in this life, all
the days of his vain life which he spendeth as a shadow? for who can
tell a man what shall be after him under the sun? 7:1 A good name is
better than precious ointment; and the day of death than the day of
one's birth. 7:2 It is better to go to the house of mourning, than to go to the
house of feasting: for that is the end of all men; and the living will
lay it to his heart. 7:3 Sorrow is better than laughter: for by the sadness of the
countenance the heart is made better. 7:4 The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning; but the heart
of fools is in the house of mirth. 7:5 It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to
hear the song of fools. 7:6 For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of
the fool: this also is vanity. 7:7 Surely oppression maketh a wise man mad; and a gift destroyeth the
heart. 7:8 Better is the end of a thing than the beginning thereof: and the
patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit. 7:9 Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger resteth in the
bosom of fools. 7:10 Say not thou, What is the cause that the former days were better
than these? for thou dost not enquire wisely concerning this. 7:11 Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to
them that see the sun. 7:12 For wisdom is a defence, and money is a defence: but the
excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom giveth life to them that have
it. 7:13 Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which
he hath made crooked? 7:14 In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in
the day of adversity consider: God also hath set the one over against
the other, to the end that man should find nothing after him. 7:15 All things have I seen in the days of my vanity: there is a just
man that perisheth in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man
that prolongeth his life in his wickedness. 7:16 Be not righteous over much; neither make thyself over wise: why
shouldest thou destroy thyself ? 7:17 Be not over much wicked,
neither be thou foolish: why shouldest thou die before thy time? 7:18
It is good that thou shouldest take hold of this; yea, also from this
withdraw not thine hand: for he that feareth God shall come forth of
them all. 7:19 Wisdom strengtheneth the wise more than ten mighty men which are
in the city. 7:20 For there is not a just man upon earth, that doeth good, and
sinneth not. 7:21 Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear
thy servant curse thee: 7:22 For oftentimes also thine own heart
knoweth that thou thyself likewise hast cursed others. 7:23 All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise; but it
was far from me. 7:24 That which is far off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out? 7:25 I applied mine heart to know, and to search, and to seek out
wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness of folly,
even of foolishness and madness: 7:26 And I find more bitter than
death the woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and her hands as
bands: whoso pleaseth God shall escape from her; but the sinner shall
be taken by her. 7:27 Behold, this have I found, saith the preacher, counting one by
one, to find out the account: 7:28 Which yet my soul seeketh, but I
find not: one man among a thousand have I found; but a woman among all
those have I not found. 7:29 Lo, this only have I found, that God hath made man upright; but
they have sought out many inventions. 8:1 Who is as the wise man? and who knoweth the interpretation of a
thing? a man's wisdom maketh his face to shine, and the boldness of
his face shall be changed. 8:2 I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and that in regard
of the oath of God. 8:3 Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an evil thing;
for he doeth whatsoever pleaseth him. 8:4 Where the word of a king is, there is power: and who may say unto
him, What doest thou? 8:5 Whoso keepeth the commandment shall feel no
evil thing: and a wise man's heart discerneth both time and judgment. 8:6 Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the
misery of man is great upon him. 8:7 For he knoweth not that which shall be: for who can tell him when
it shall be? 8:8 There is no man that hath power over the spirit to
retain the spirit; neither hath he power in the day of death: and
there is no discharge in that war; neither shall wickedness deliver
those that are given to it. 8:9 All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work that is
done under the sun: there is a time wherein one man ruleth over
another to his own hurt. 8:10 And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the
place of the holy, and they were forgotten in the city where they had
so done: this is also vanity. 8:11 Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil. 8:12 Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be
prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear
God, which fear before him: 8:13 But it shall not be well with the
wicked, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow;
because he feareth not before God. 8:14 There is a vanity which is done upon the earth; that there be
just men, unto whom it happeneth according to the work of the wicked;
again, there be wicked men, to whom it happeneth according to the work
of the righteous: I said that this also is vanity. 8:15 Then I commended mirth, because a man hath no better thing under
the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall
abide with him of his labour the days of his life, which God giveth
him under the sun. 8:16 When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business
that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor
night seeth sleep with his eyes:) 8:17 Then I beheld all the work of
God, that a man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun:
because though a man labour to seek it out, yet he shall not find it;
yea farther; though a wise man think to know it, yet shall he not be
able to find it. 9:1 For all this I considered in my heart even to declare all this,
that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of
God: no man knoweth either love or hatred by all that is before them. 9:2 All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous,
and to the wicked; to the good and to the clean, and to the unclean;
to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the
good, so is the sinner; and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an
oath. 9:3 This is an evil among all things that are done under the sun, that
there is one event unto all: yea, also the heart of the sons of men is
full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after
that they go to the dead. 9:4 For to him that is joined to all the living there is hope: for a
living dog is better than a dead lion. 9:5 For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any
thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is
forgotten. 9:6 Also their love, and their hatred, and their envy, is now
perished; neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing
that is done under the sun. 9:7 Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
merry heart; for God now accepteth thy works. 9:8 Let thy garments be always white; and let thy head lack no
ointment. 9:9 Live joyfully with the wife whom thou lovest all the days of the
life of thy vanity, which he hath given thee under the sun, all the
days of thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy
labour which thou takest under the sun. 9:10 Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for
there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
whither thou goest. 9:11 I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise,
nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favour to men of
skill; but time and chance happeneth to them all. 9:12 For man also knoweth not his time: as the fishes that are taken
in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare; so are
the sons of men snared in an evil time, when it falleth suddenly upon
them. 9:13 This wisdom have I seen also under the sun, and it seemed great
unto me: 9:14 There was a little city, and few men within it; and
there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great
bulwarks against it: 9:15 Now there was found in it a poor wise man,
and he by his wisdom delivered the city; yet no man remembered that
same poor man. 9:16 Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength: nevertheless the
poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. 9:17 The words of wise men are heard in quiet more than the cry of him
that ruleth among fools. 9:18 Wisdom is better than weapons of war: but one sinner destroyeth
much good. 10:1 Dead flies cause the ointment of the apothecary to send forth a
stinking savour: so doth a little folly him that is in reputation for
wisdom and honour. 10:2 A wise man's heart is at his right hand; but a fool's heart at
his left. 10:3 Yea also, when he that is a fool walketh by the way, his wisdom
faileth him, and he saith to every one that he is a fool. 10:4 If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy
place; for yielding pacifieth great offences. 10:5 There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, as an error
which proceedeth from the ruler: 10:6 Folly is set in great dignity,
and the rich sit in low place. 10:7 I have seen servants upon horses, and princes walking as servants
upon the earth. 10:8 He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it; and whoso breaketh an
hedge, a serpent shall bite him. 10:9 Whoso removeth stones shall be hurt therewith; and he that
cleaveth wood shall be endangered thereby. 10:10 If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he
put to more strength: but wisdom is profitable to direct. 10:11 Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment; and a babbler
is no better. 10:12 The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious; but the lips of a
fool will swallow up himself. 10:13 The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness: and the
end of his talk is mischievous madness. 10:14 A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be;
and what shall be after him, who can tell him? 10:15 The labour of
the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth not how to
go to the city. 10:16 Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy princes
eat in the morning! 10:17 Blessed art thou, O land, when thy king is
the son of nobles, and thy princes eat in due season, for strength,
and not for drunkenness! 10:18 By much slothfulness the building
decayeth; and through idleness of the hands the house droppeth
through. 10:19 A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry: but money
answereth all things. 10:20 Curse not the king, no not in thy thought; and curse not the
rich in thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice,
and that which hath wings shall tell the matter. 11:1 Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shalt find it after many
days. 11:2 Give a portion to seven, and also to eight; for thou knowest not
what evil shall be upon the earth. 11:3 If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the
earth: and if the tree fall toward the south, or toward the north, in
the place where the tree falleth, there it shall be. 11:4 He that observeth the wind shall not sow; and he that regardeth
the clouds shall not reap. 11:5 As thou knowest not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the
bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou
knowest not the works of God who maketh all. 11:6 In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not
thine hand: for thou knowest not whether shall prosper, either this or
that, or whether they both shall be alike good. 11:7 Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes
to behold the sun: 11:8 But if a man live many years, and rejoice in
them all; yet let him remember the days of darkness; for they shall be
many. All that cometh is vanity. 11:9 Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth; and let thy heart cheer thee
in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in
the sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God
will bring thee into judgment. 11:10 Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from
thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity. 12:1 Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shalt say, I have no
pleasure in them; 12:2 While the sun, or the light, or the moon, or
the stars, be not darkened, nor the clouds return after the rain: 12:3
In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong
men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few,
and those that look out of the windows be darkened, 12:4 And the doors
shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the grinding is low,
and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the daughters
of musick shall be brought low; 12:5 Also when they shall be afraid of
that which is high, and fears shall be in the way, and the almond tree
shall flourish, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire
shall fail: because man goeth to his long home, and the mourners go
about the streets: 12:6 Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the
golden bowl be broken, or the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or
the wheel broken at the cistern. 12:7 Then shall the dust return to the earth as it was: and the spirit
shall return unto God who gave it. 12:8 Vanity of vanities, saith the preacher; all is vanity. 12:9 And moreover, because the preacher was wise, he still taught the
people knowledge; yea, he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in
order many proverbs. 12:10 The preacher sought to find out acceptable words: and that which
was written was upright, even words of truth. 12:11 The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the
masters of assemblies, which are given from one shepherd. 12:12 And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many
books there is no end; and much study is a weariness of the flesh. 12:13 Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and
keep his commandments: for this is the whole duty of man. 12:14 For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil. The Song of Solomon


1:1 The song of songs, which is Solomon's. 1:2 Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is
better than wine. 1:3 Because of the savour of thy good ointments thy name is as
ointment poured forth, therefore do the virgins love thee. 1:4 Draw me, we will run after thee: the king hath brought me into his
chambers: we will be glad and rejoice in thee, we will remember thy
love more than wine: the upright love thee. 1:5 I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents
of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon. 1:6 Look not upon me, because I am black, because the sun hath looked
upon me: my mother's children were angry with me; they made me the
keeper of the vineyards; but mine own vineyard have I not kept. 1:7 Tell me, O thou whom my soul loveth, where thou feedest, where
thou makest thy flock to rest at noon: for why should I be as one that
turneth aside by the flocks of thy companions? 1:8 If thou know not,
O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the
flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds' tents. 1:9 I have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in
Pharaoh's chariots. 1:10 Thy cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains
of gold. 1:11 We will make thee borders of gold with studs of silver. 1:12 While the king sitteth at his table, my spikenard sendeth forth
the smell thereof. 1:13 A bundle of myrrh is my well-beloved unto me; he shall lie all
night betwixt my breasts. 1:14 My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the vineyards
of Engedi. 1:15 Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
doves' eyes. 1:16 Behold, thou art fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant: also our bed is
green. 1:17 The beams of our house are cedar, and our rafters of fir. 2:1 I am the rose of Sharon, and the lily of the valleys. 2:2 As the lily among thorns, so is my love among the daughters. 2:3 As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved
among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was sweet to my taste. 2:4 He brought me to the banqueting house, and his banner over me was
love. 2:5 Stay me with flagons, comfort me with apples: for I am sick of
love. 2:6 His left hand is under my head, and his right hand doth embrace
me. 2:7 I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he
please. 2:8 The voice of my beloved! behold, he cometh leaping upon the
mountains, skipping upon the hills. 2:9 My beloved is like a roe or a young hart: behold, he standeth
behind our wall, he looketh forth at the windows, shewing himself
through the lattice. 2:10 My beloved spake, and said unto me, Rise up, my love, my fair
one, and come away. 2:11 For, lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone; 2:12 The
flowers appear on the earth; the time of the singing of birds is come,
and the voice of the turtle is heard in our land; 2:13 The fig tree
putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grape give
a good smell. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away. 2:14 O my dove, that art in the clefts of the rock, in the secret
places of the stairs, let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy
voice; for sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. 2:15 Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vines: for
our vines have tender grapes. 2:16 My beloved is mine, and I am his: he feedeth among the lilies. 2:17 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved,
and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether. 3:1 By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loveth: I sought him,
but I found him not. 3:2 I will rise now, and go about the city in the streets, and in the
broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loveth: I sought him, but I
found him not. 3:3 The watchmen that go about the city found me: to whom I said, Saw
ye him whom my soul loveth? 3:4 It was but a little that I passed
from them, but I found him whom my soul loveth: I held him, and would
not let him go, until I had brought him into my mother's house, and
into the chamber of her that conceived me. 3:5 I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, and by the
hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he
please. 3:6 Who is this that cometh out of the wilderness like pillars of
smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the
merchant? 3:7 Behold his bed, which is Solomon's; threescore valiant
men are about it, of the valiant of Israel. 3:8 They all hold swords, being expert in war: every man hath his
sword upon his thigh because of fear in the night. 3:9 King Solomon made himself a chariot of the wood of Lebanon. 3:10 He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of
gold, the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with
love, for the daughters of Jerusalem. 3:11 Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with
the crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his
espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart. 4:1 Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair; thou hast
doves' eyes within thy locks: thy hair is as a flock of goats, that
appear from mount Gilead. 4:2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which
came up from the washing; whereof every one bear twins, and none is
barren among them. 4:3 Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely:
thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks. 4:4 Thy neck is like the tower of David builded for an armoury,
whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men. 4:5 Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins, which feed
among the lilies. 4:6 Until the day break, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to
the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense. 4:7 Thou art all fair, my love; there is no spot in thee. 4:8 Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon: look
from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the
lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards. 4:9 Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse; thou hast
ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck. 4:10 How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse! how much better is
thy love than wine! and the smell of thine ointments than all spices! 4:11 Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and milk are
under thy tongue; and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of
Lebanon. 4:12 A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed. 4:13 Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits;
camphire, with spikenard, 4:14 Spikenard and saffron; calamus and
cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all
the chief spices: 4:15 A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters,
and streams from Lebanon. 4:16 Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon my garden,
that the spices thereof may flow out. Let my beloved come into his
garden, and eat his pleasant fruits. 5:1 I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gathered my
myrrh with my spice; I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey; I have
drunk my wine with my milk: eat, O friends; drink, yea, drink
abundantly, O beloved. 5:2 I sleep, but my heart waketh: it is the voice of my beloved that
knocketh, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my
undefiled: for my head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops
of the night. 5:3 I have put off my coat; how shall I put it on? I have washed my
feet; how shall I defile them? 5:4 My beloved put in his hand by the
hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him. 5:5 I rose up to open to my beloved; and my hands dropped with myrrh,
and my fingers with sweet smelling myrrh, upon the handles of the
lock. 5:6 I opened to my beloved; but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and
was gone: my soul failed when he spake: I sought him, but I could not
find him; I called him, but he gave me no answer. 5:7 The watchmen that went about the city found me, they smote me,
they wounded me; the keepers of the walls took away my veil from me. 5:8 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved,
that ye tell him, that I am sick of love. 5:9 What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest
among women? what is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou
dost so charge us? 5:10 My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest
among ten thousand. 5:11 His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushy, and black
as a raven. 5:12 His eyes are as the eyes of doves by the rivers of waters, washed
with milk, and fitly set. 5:13 His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips
like lilies, dropping sweet smelling myrrh. 5:14 His hands are as gold rings set with the beryl: his belly is as
bright ivory overlaid with sapphires. 5:15 His legs are as pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold:
his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the cedars. 5:16 His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. 6:1 Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? whither
is thy beloved turned aside? that we may seek him with thee. 6:2 My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to
feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies. 6:3 I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine: he feedeth among the
lilies. 6:4 Thou art beautiful, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as an army with banners. 6:5 Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy hair
is as a flock of goats that appear from Gilead. 6:6 Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing,
whereof every one beareth twins, and there is not one barren among
them. 6:7 As a piece of a pomegranate are thy temples within thy locks. 6:8 There are threescore queens, and fourscore concubines, and virgins
without number. 6:9 My dove, my undefiled is but one; she is the only one of her
mother, she is the choice one of her that bare her. The daughters saw
her, and blessed her; yea, the queens and the concubines, and they
praised her. 6:10 Who is she that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon,
clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners? 6:11 I went
down into the garden of nuts to see the fruits of the valley, and to
see whether the vine flourished and the pomegranates budded. 6:12 Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the chariots of
Amminadib. 6:13 Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may look
upon thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite? As it were the company
of two armies. 7:1 How beautiful are thy feet with shoes, O prince's daughter! the
joints of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a
cunning workman. 7:2 Thy navel is like a round goblet, which wanteth not liquor: thy
belly is like an heap of wheat set about with lilies. 7:3 Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins. 7:4 Thy neck is as a tower of ivory; thine eyes like the fishpools in
Heshbon, by the gate of Bathrabbim: thy nose is as the tower of
Lebanon which looketh toward Damascus. 7:5 Thine head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thine head
like purple; the king is held in the galleries. 7:6 How fair and how pleasant art thou, O love, for delights! 7:7
This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to clusters
of grapes. 7:8 I said, I will go up to the palm tree, I will take hold of the
boughs thereof: now also thy breasts shall be as clusters of the vine,
and the smell of thy nose like apples; 7:9 And the roof of thy mouth
like the best wine for my beloved, that goeth down sweetly, causing
the lips of those that are asleep to speak. 7:10 I am my beloved's, and his desire is toward me. 7:11 Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field; let us lodge in
the villages. 7:12 Let us get up early to the vineyards; let us see if the vine
flourish, whether the tender grape appear, and the pomegranates bud
forth: there will I give thee my loves. 7:13 The mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my
beloved. 8:1 O that thou wert as my brother, that sucked the breasts of my
mother! when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee; yea, I
should not be despised. 8:2 I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mother's house, who
would instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine of the
juice of my pomegranate. 8:3 His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should
embrace me. 8:4 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor
awake my love, until he please. 8:5 Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved? I raised thee up under the apple tree: there thy mother
brought thee forth: there she brought thee forth that bare thee. 8:6 Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm: for
love is strong as death; jealousy is cruel as the grave: the coals
thereof are coals of fire, which hath a most vehement flame. 8:7 Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it:
if a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would
utterly be contemned. 8:8 We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts: what shall we do
for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for? 8:9 If she be
a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver: and if she be a
door, we will inclose her with boards of cedar. 8:10 I am a wall, and my breasts like towers: then was I in his eyes
as one that found favour. 8:11 Solomon had a vineyard at Baalhamon; he let out the vineyard unto
keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand
pieces of silver. 8:12 My vineyard, which is mine, is before me: thou, O Solomon, must
have a thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred. 8:13 Thou that dwellest in the gardens, the companions hearken to thy
voice: cause me to hear it. 8:14 Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young
hart upon the mountains of spices. The Book of the Prophet Isaiah


1:1 The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning
Judah and Jerusalem in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah,
kings of Judah. 1:2 Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth: for the LORD hath spoken,
I have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled
against me. 1:3 The ox knoweth his owner, and the ass his master's crib: but
Israel doth not know, my people doth not consider. 1:4 Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of
evildoers, children that are corrupters: they have forsaken the LORD,
they have provoked the Holy One of Israel unto anger, they are gone
away backward. 1:5 Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will revolt more and more:
the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. 1:6 From the sole of the foot even unto the head there is no soundness
in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not
been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with ointment. 1:7 Your country is desolate, your cities are burned with fire: your
land, strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as
overthrown by strangers. 1:8 And the daughter of Zion is left as a cottage in a vineyard, as a
lodge in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city. 1:9 Except the LORD of hosts had left unto us a very small remnant, we
should have been as Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah. 1:10 Hear the word of the LORD, ye rulers of Sodom; give ear unto the
law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah. 1:11 To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? saith the LORD: I am full of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat
of fed beasts; and I delight not in the blood of bullocks, or of
lambs, or of he goats. 1:12 When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your
hand, to tread my courts? 1:13 Bring no more vain oblations; incense
is an abomination unto me; the new moons and sabbaths, the calling of
assemblies, I cannot away with; it is iniquity, even the solemn
meeting. 1:14 Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hateth: they are
a trouble unto me; I am weary to bear them. 1:15 And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from
you: yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear: your hands are
full of blood. 1:16 Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings from
before mine eyes; cease to do evil; 1:17 Learn to do well; seek
judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the
widow. 1:18 Come now, and let us reason together, saith the LORD: though your
sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red
like crimson, they shall be as wool. 1:19 If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land:
1:20 But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword:
for the mouth of the LORD hath spoken it. 1:21 How is the faithful city become an harlot! it was full of
judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. 1:22 Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water: 1:23 Thy
princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loveth
gifts, and followeth after rewards: they judge not the fatherless,
neither doth the cause of the widow come unto them. 1:24 Therefore saith the LORD, the LORD of hosts, the mighty One of
Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine
enemies: 1:25 And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away
thy dross, and take away all thy tin: 1:26 And I will restore thy
judges as at the first, and thy counsellors as at the beginning:
afterward thou shalt be called, The city of righteousness, the
faithful city. 1:27 Zion shall be redeemed with judgment, and her converts with
righteousness. 1:28 And the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners shall
be together, and they that forsake the LORD shall be consumed. 1:29 For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and
ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen. 1:30 For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fadeth, and as a garden that
hath no water. 1:31 And the strong shall be as tow, and the maker of it as a spark,
and they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them. 2:1 The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and
Jerusalem. 2:2 And it shall come to pass in the last days, that the mountain of
the LORD's house shall be established in the top of the mountains, and
shall be exalted above the hills; and all nations shall flow unto it. 2:3 And many people shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the LORD, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion
shall go forth the law, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem. 2:4 And he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many
people: and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their
spears into pruninghooks: nation shall not lift up sword against
nation, neither shall they learn war any more. 2:5 O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of the
LORD. 2:6 Therefore thou hast forsaken thy people the house of Jacob,
because they be replenished from the east, and are soothsayers like
the Philistines, and they please themselves in the children of
strangers. 2:7 Their land also is full of silver and gold, neither is there any
end of their treasures; their land is also full of horses, neither is
there any end of their chariots: 2:8 Their land also is full of idols;
they worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers
have made: 2:9 And the mean man boweth down, and the great man
humbleth himself: therefore forgive them not. 2:10 Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, for fear of the
LORD, and for the glory of his majesty. 2:11 The lofty looks of man shall be humbled, and the haughtiness of
men shall be bowed down, and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that
day. 2:12 For the day of the LORD of hosts shall be upon every one that is
proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up; and he shall be
brought low: 2:13 And upon all the cedars of Lebanon, that are high
and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan, 2:14 And upon all the
high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up, 2:15 And
upon every high tower, and upon every fenced wall, 2:16 And upon all
the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant pictures. 2:17 And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness
of men shall be made low: and the LORD alone shall be exalted in that
day. 2:18 And the idols he shall utterly abolish. 2:19 And they shall go into the holes of the rocks, and into the caves
of the earth, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of his majesty,
when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. 2:20 In that day a man shall cast his idols of silver, and his idols
of gold, which they made each one for himself to worship, to the moles
and to the bats; 2:21 To go into the clefts of the rocks, and into the
tops of the ragged rocks, for fear of the LORD, and for the glory of
his majesty, when he ariseth to shake terribly the earth. 2:22 Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils: for wherein
is he to be accounted of ? 3:1 For, behold, the Lord, the LORD of
hosts, doth take away from Jerusalem and from Judah the stay and the
staff, the whole stay of bread, and the whole stay of water. 3:2 The mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet,
and the prudent, and the ancient, 3:3 The captain of fifty, and the
honourable man, and the counsellor, and the cunning artificer, and the
eloquent orator. 3:4 And I will give children to be their princes, and babes shall rule
over them. 3:5 And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every
one by his neighbour: the child shall behave himself proudly against
the ancient, and the base against the honourable. 3:6 When a man shall take hold of his brother of the house of his
father, saying, Thou hast clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this
ruin be under thy hand: 3:7 In that day shall he swear, saying, I will
not be an healer; for in my house is neither bread nor clothing: make
me not a ruler of the people. 3:8 For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: because their tongue
and their doings are against the LORD, to provoke the eyes of his
glory. 3:9 The shew of their countenance doth witness against them; and they
declare their sin as Sodom, they hide it not. Woe unto their soul! for
they have rewarded evil unto themselves. 3:10 Say ye to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they
shall eat the fruit of their doings. 3:11 Woe unto the wicked! it shall be ill with him: for the reward of
his hands shall be given him. 3:12 As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule
over them. O my people, they which lead thee cause thee to err, and
destroy the way of thy paths. 3:13 The LORD standeth up to plead, and standeth to judge the people. 3:14 The LORD will enter into judgment with the ancients of his
people, and the princes thereof: for ye have eaten up the vineyard;
the spoil of the poor is in your houses. 3:15 What mean ye that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the
faces of the poor? saith the Lord GOD of hosts. 3:16 Moreover the LORD saith, Because the daughters of Zion are
haughty, and walk with stretched forth necks and wanton eyes, walking
and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet: 3:17
Therefore the LORD will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the
daughters of Zion, and the LORD will discover their secret parts. 3:18 In that day the Lord will take away the bravery of their tinkling
ornaments about their feet, and their cauls, and their round tires
like the moon, 3:19 The chains, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
3:20 The bonnets, and the ornaments of the legs, and the headbands,
and the tablets, and the earrings, 3:21 The rings, and nose jewels,
3:22 The changeable suits of apparel, and the mantles, and the
wimples, and the crisping pins, 3:23 The glasses, and the fine linen,
and the hoods, and the vails. 3:24 And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet smell there
shall be stink; and instead of a girdle a rent; and instead of well
set hair baldness; and instead of a stomacher a girding of sackcloth;
and burning instead of beauty. 3:25 Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war. 3:26 And her gates shall lament and mourn; and she being desolate
shall sit upon the ground. 4:1 And in that day seven women shall take hold of one man, saying, We
will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel: only let us be
called by thy name, to take away our reproach. 4:2 In that day shall the branch of the LORD be beautiful and
glorious, and the fruit of the earth shall be excellent and comely for
them that are escaped of Israel. 4:3 And it shall come to pass, that he that is left in Zion, and he
that remaineth in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even every one that
is written among the living in Jerusalem: 4:4 When the Lord shall have
washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged
the blood of Jerusalem from the midst thereof by the spirit of
judgment, and by the spirit of burning. 4:5 And the LORD will create upon every dwelling place of mount Zion,
and upon her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of
a flaming fire by night: for upon all the glory shall be a defence. 4:6 And there shall be a tabernacle for a shadow in the day time from
the heat, and for a place of refuge, and for a covert from storm and
from rain. 5:1 Now will I sing to my wellbeloved a song of my beloved touching
his vineyard. My wellbeloved hath a vineyard in a very fruitful hill:
5:2 And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted
it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and
also made a winepress therein: and he looked that it should bring
forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes. 5:3 And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge, I
pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard. 5:4 What could have been done more to my vineyard, that I have not
done in it? wherefore, when I looked that it should bring forth
grapes, brought it forth wild grapes? 5:5 And now go to; I will tell
you what I will do to my vineyard: I will take away the hedge thereof,
and it shall be eaten up; and break down the wall thereof, and it
shall be trodden down: 5:6 And I will lay it waste: it shall not be
pruned, nor digged; but there shall come up briers and thorns: I will
also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it. 5:7 For the vineyard of the LORD of hosts is the house of Israel, and
the men of Judah his pleasant plant: and he looked for judgment, but
behold oppression; for righteousness, but behold a cry. 5:8 Woe unto them that join house to house, that lay field to field,
till there be no place, that they may be placed alone in the midst of
the earth! 5:9 In mine ears said the LORD of hosts, Of a truth many
houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant. 5:10 Yea, ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and the seed of
an homer shall yield an ephah. 5:11 Woe unto them that rise up early in the morning, that they may
follow strong drink; that continue until night, till wine inflame
them! 5:12 And the harp, and the viol, the tabret, and pipe, and
wine, are in their feasts: but they regard not the work of the LORD,
neither consider the operation of his hands. 5:13 Therefore my people are gone into captivity, because they have no
knowledge: and their honourable men are famished, and their multitude
dried up with thirst. 5:14 Therefore hell hath enlarged herself, and opened her mouth
without measure: and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp,
and he that rejoiceth, shall descend into it. 5:15 And the mean man shall be brought down, and the mighty man shall
be humbled, and the eyes of the lofty shall be humbled: 5:16 But the
LORD of hosts shall be exalted in judgment, and God that is holy shall
be sanctified in righteousness. 5:17 Then shall the lambs feed after their manner, and the waste
places of the fat ones shall strangers eat. 5:18 Woe unto them that draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as
it were with a cart rope: 5:19 That say, Let him make speed, and
hasten his work, that we may see it: and let the counsel of the Holy
One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it! 5:20 Woe unto
them that call evil good, and good evil; that put darkness for light,
and light for darkness; that put bitter for sweet, and sweet for
bitter! 5:21 Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes, and
prudent in their own sight! 5:22 Woe unto them that are mighty to
drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink: 5:23 Which
justify the wicked for reward, and take away the righteousness of the
righteous from him! 5:24 Therefore as the fire devoureth the stubble,
and the flame consumeth the chaff, so their root shall be as
rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust: because they have
cast away the law of the LORD of hosts, and despised the word of the
Holy One of Israel. 5:25 Therefore is the anger of the LORD kindled against his people,
and he hath stretched forth his hand against them, and hath smitten
them: and the hills did tremble, and their carcases were torn in the
midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched
out still. 5:26 And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will
hiss unto them from the end of the earth: and, behold, they shall come
with speed swiftly: 5:27 None shall be weary nor stumble among them;
none shall slumber nor sleep; neither shall the girdle of their loins
be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken: 5:28 Whose arrows
are sharp, and all their bows bent, their horses' hoofs shall be
counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirlwind: 5:29 Their
roaring shall be like a lion, they shall roar like young lions: yea,
they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away
safe, and none shall deliver it. 5:30 And in that day they shall roar against them like the roaring of
the sea: and if one look unto the land, behold darkness and sorrow,
and the light is darkened in the heavens thereof. 6:1 In the year that king Uzziah died I saw also the LORD sitting upon
a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple. 6:2 Above it stood the seraphims: each one had six wings; with twain
he covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and with
twain he did fly. 6:3 And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is the
LORD of hosts: the whole earth is full of his glory. 6:4 And the posts of the door moved at the voice of him that cried,
and the house was filled with smoke. 6:5 Then said I, Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of
unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips:
for mine eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts. 6:6 Then flew one of the seraphims unto me, having a live coal in his
hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar: 6:7 And he
laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and
thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged. 6:8 Also I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and
who will go for us? Then said I, Here am I; send me. 6:9 And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but
understand not; and see ye indeed, but perceive not. 6:10 Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and
shut their eyes; lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their
ears, and understand with their heart, and convert, and be healed. 6:11 Then said I, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until the cities be
wasted without inhabitant, and the houses without man, and the land be
utterly desolate, 6:12 And the LORD have removed men far away, and
there be a great forsaking in the midst of the land. 6:13 But yet in it shall be a tenth, and it shall return, and shall be
eaten: as a teil tree, and as an oak, whose substance is in them, when
they cast their leaves: so the holy seed shall be the substance
thereof. 7:1 And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son
of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the
son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up toward Jerusalem to war
against it, but could not prevail against it. 7:2 And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is confederate
with Ephraim. And his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as
the trees of the wood are moved with the wind. 7:3 Then said the LORD unto Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou,
and Shearjashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool
in the highway of the fuller's field; 7:4 And say unto him, Take heed,
and be quiet; fear not, neither be fainthearted for the two tails of
these smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria,
and of the son of Remaliah. 7:5 Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have taken evil
counsel against thee, saying, 7:6 Let us go up against Judah, and vex
it, and let us make a breach therein for us, and set a king in the
midst of it, even the son of Tabeal: 7:7 Thus saith the Lord GOD, It
shall not stand, neither shall it come to pass. 7:8 For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is
Rezin; and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken,
that it be not a people. 7:9 And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is
Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established. 7:10 Moreover the LORD spake again unto Ahaz, saying, 7:11 Ask thee a
sign of the LORD thy God; ask it either in the depth, or in the height
above. 7:12 But Ahaz said, I will not ask, neither will I tempt the LORD. 7:13 And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David; Is it a small thing
for you to weary men, but will ye weary my God also? 7:14 Therefore
the Lord himself shall give you a sign; Behold, a virgin shall
conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel. 7:15 Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the
evil, and choose the good. 7:16 For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose
the good, the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her
kings. 7:17 The LORD shall bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy
father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim
departed from Judah; even the king of Assyria. 7:18 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the LORD shall hiss
for the fly that is in the uttermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and
for the bee that is in the land of Assyria. 7:19 And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate
valleys, and in the holes of the rocks, and upon all thorns, and upon
all bushes. 7:20 In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired,
namely, by them beyond the river, by the king of Assyria, the head,
and the hair of the feet: and it shall also consume the beard. 7:21 And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a
young cow, and two sheep; 7:22 And it shall come to pass, for the
abundance of milk that they shall give he shall eat butter: for butter
and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land. 7:23 And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place shall be,
where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings, it shall
even be for briers and thorns. 7:24 With arrows and with bows shall men come thither; because all the
land shall become briers and thorns. 7:25 And on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock, there
shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns: but it shall be
for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of lesser cattle. 8:1 Moreover the LORD said unto me, Take thee a great roll, and write
in it with a man's pen concerning Mahershalalhashbaz. 8:2 And I took unto me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest,
and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah. 8:3 And I went unto the prophetess; and she conceived, and bare a son. Then said the LORD to me, Call his name Mahershalalhashbaz. 8:4 For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and
my mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be
taken away before the king of Assyria. 8:5 The LORD spake also unto me again, saying, 8:6 Forasmuch as this
people refuseth the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in
Rezin and Remaliah's son; 8:7 Now therefore, behold, the Lord bringeth
up upon them the waters of the river, strong and many, even the king
of Assyria, and all his glory: and he shall come up over all his
channels, and go over all his banks: 8:8 And he shall pass through
Judah; he shall overflow and go over, he shall reach even to the neck;
and the stretching out of his wings shall fill the breadth of thy
land, O Immanuel. 8:9 Associate yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in
pieces; and give ear, all ye of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye
shall be broken in pieces; gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in
pieces. 8:10 Take counsel together, and it shall come to nought; speak the
word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us. 8:11 For the LORD spake thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed
me that I should not walk in the way of this people, saying, 8:12 Say
ye not, A confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A
confederacy; neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. 8:13 Sanctify the LORD of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and
let him be your dread. 8:14 And he shall be for a sanctuary; but for a stone of stumbling and
for a rock of offence to both the houses of Israel, for a gin and for
a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem. 8:15 And many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken, and
be snared, and be taken. 8:16 Bind up the testimony, seal the law among my disciples. 8:17 And I will wait upon the LORD, that hideth his face from the
house of Jacob, and I will look for him. 8:18 Behold, I and the children whom the LORD hath given me are for
signs and for wonders in Israel from the LORD of hosts, which dwelleth
in mount Zion. 8:19 And when they shall say unto you, Seek unto them that have
familiar spirits, and unto wizards that peep, and that mutter: should
not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the dead? 8:20 To
the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. 8:21 And they shall pass through it, hardly bestead and hungry: and it
shall come to pass, that when they shall be hungry, they shall fret
themselves, and curse their king and their God, and look upward. 8:22 And they shall look unto the earth; and behold trouble and
darkness, dimness of anguish; and they shall be driven to darkness. 9:1 Nevertheless the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation,
when at the first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the
land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously afflict her by the
way of the sea, beyond Jordan, in Galilee of the nations. 9:2 The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they
that dwell in the land of the shadow of death, upon them hath the
light shined. 9:3 Thou hast multiplied the nation, and not increased the joy: they
joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, and as men rejoice
when they divide the spoil. 9:4 For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his
shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, as in the day of Midian. 9:5 For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise, and
garments rolled in blood; but this shall be with burning and fuel of
fire. 9:6 For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the
government shall be upon his shoulder: and his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The
Prince of Peace. 9:7 Of the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end,
upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with justice from henceforth even for
ever. The zeal of the LORD of hosts will perform this. 9:8 The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it hath lighted upon Israel. 9:9 And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of
Samaria, that say in the pride and stoutness of heart, 9:10 The bricks
are fallen down, but we will build with hewn stones: the sycomores are
cut down, but we will change them into cedars. 9:11 Therefore the LORD shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against
him, and join his enemies together; 9:12 The Syrians before, and the
Philistines behind; and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For
all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still. 9:13 For the people turneth not unto him that smiteth them, neither do
they seek the LORD of hosts. 9:14 Therefore the LORD will cut off from Israel head and tail, branch
and rush, in one day. 9:15 The ancient and honourable, he is the head; and the prophet that
teacheth lies, he is the tail. 9:16 For the leaders of this people cause them to err; and they that
are led of them are destroyed. 9:17 Therefore the LORD shall have no joy in their young men, neither
shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows: for every one is an
hypocrite and an evildoer, and every mouth speaketh folly. For all
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still. 9:18 For wickedness burneth as the fire: it shall devour the briers
and thorns, and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest, and they
shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke. 9:19 Through the wrath of the LORD of hosts is the land darkened, and
the people shall be as the fuel of the fire: no man shall spare his
brother. 9:20 And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry; and he
shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied: they
shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm: 9:21 Manasseh, Ephraim;
and Ephraim, Manasseh: and they together shall be against Judah. For
all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still. 10:1 Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write
grievousness which they have prescribed; 10:2 To turn aside the needy
from judgment, and to take away the right from the poor of my people,
that widows may be their prey, and that they may rob the fatherless! 10:3 And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the
desolation which shall come from far? to whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye leave your glory? 10:4 Without me they shall bow
down under the prisoners, and they shall fall under the slain. For all
this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still. 10:5 O Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, and the staff in their hand is
mine indignation. 10:6 I will send him against an hypocritical nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to
take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets. 10:7 Howbeit he meaneth not so, neither doth his heart think so; but
it is in his heart to destroy and cut off nations not a few. 10:8 For he saith, Are not my princes altogether kings? 10:9 Is not
Calno as Carchemish? is not Hamath as Arpad? is not Samaria as
Damascus? 10:10 As my hand hath found the kingdoms of the idols, and
whose graven images did excel them of Jerusalem and of Samaria; 10:11
Shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, so do to
Jerusalem and her idols? 10:12 Wherefore it shall come to pass, that
when the Lord hath performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on
Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of
Assyria, and the glory of his high looks. 10:13 For he saith, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by
my wisdom; for I am prudent: and I have removed the bounds of the
people, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the
inhabitants like a valiant man: 10:14 And my hand hath found as a nest
the riches of the people: and as one gathereth eggs that are left,
have I gathered all the earth; and there was none that moved the wing,
or opened the mouth, or peeped. 10:15 Shall the axe boast itself against him that heweth therewith? or
shall the saw magnify itself against him that shaketh it? as if the
rod should shake itself against them that lift it up, or as if the
staff should lift up itself, as if it were no wood. 10:16 Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send among his fat
ones leanness; and under his glory he shall kindle a burning like the
burning of a fire. 10:17 And the light of Israel shall be for a fire, and his Holy One
for a flame: and it shall burn and devour his thorns and his briers in
one day; 10:18 And shall consume the glory of his forest, and of his
fruitful field, both soul and body: and they shall be as when a
standard-bearer fainteth. 10:19 And the rest of the trees of his forest shall be few, that a
child may write them. 10:20 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of
Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more
again stay upon him that smote them; but shall stay upon the LORD, the
Holy One of Israel, in truth. 10:21 The remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, unto the
mighty God. 10:22 For though thy people Israel be as the sand of the sea, yet a
remnant of them shall return: the consumption decreed shall overflow
with righteousness. 10:23 For the Lord GOD of hosts shall make a consumption, even
determined, in the midst of all the land. 10:24 Therefore thus saith the Lord GOD of hosts, O my people that
dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian: he shall smite thee
with a rod, and shall lift up his staff against thee, after the manner
of Egypt. 10:25 For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall cease,
and mine anger in their destruction. 10:26 And the LORD of hosts shall stir up a scourge for him according
to the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb: and as his rod was
upon the sea, so shall he lift it up after the manner of Egypt. 10:27 And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall be
taken away from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and
the yoke shall be destroyed because of the anointing. 10:28 He is come to Aiath, he is passed to Migron; at Michmash he hath
laid up his carriages: 10:29 They are gone over the passage: they have
taken up their lodging at Geba; Ramah is afraid; Gibeah of Saul is
fled. 10:30 Lift up thy voice, O daughter of Gallim: cause it to be heard
unto Laish, O poor Anathoth. 10:31 Madmenah is removed; the inhabitants of Gebim gather themselves
to flee. 10:32 As yet shall he remain at Nob that day: he shall shake his hand
against the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. 10:33 Behold, the Lord, the LORD of hosts, shall lop the bough with
terror: and the high ones of stature shall be hewn down, and the
haughty shall be humbled. 10:34 And he shall cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and
Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one. 11:1 And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a
Branch shall grow out of his roots: 11:2 And the spirit of the LORD
shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the
spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear
of the LORD; 11:3 And shall make him of quick understanding in the
fear of the LORD: and he shall not judge after the sight of his eyes,
neither reprove after the hearing of his ears: 11:4 But with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the
meek of the earth: and he shall smite the earth: with the rod of his
mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. 11:5 And righteousness shall be the girdle of his loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of his reins. 11:6 The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall
lie down with the kid; and the calf and the young lion and the fatling
together; and a little child shall lead them. 11:7 And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie
down together: and the lion shall eat straw like the ox. 11:8 And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the
weaned child shall put his hand on the cockatrice' den. 11:9 They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the
earth shall be full of the knowledge of the LORD, as the waters cover
the sea. 11:10 And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an ensign of the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek: and
his rest shall be glorious. 11:11 And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord shall set
his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people,
which shall be left, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros,
and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and
from the islands of the sea. 11:12 And he shall set up an ensign for the nations, and shall
assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of
Judah from the four corners of the earth. 11:13 The envy also of Ephraim shall depart, and the adversaries of
Judah shall be cut off: Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall
not vex Ephraim. 11:14 But they shall fly upon the shoulders of the Philistines toward
the west; they shall spoil them of the east together: they shall lay
their hand upon Edom and Moab; and the children of Ammon shall obey
them. 11:15 And the LORD shall utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian
sea; and with his mighty wind shall he shake his hand over the river,
and shall smite it in the seven streams, and make men go over dryshod. 11:16 And there shall be an highway for the remnant of his people,
which shall be left, from Assyria; like as it was to Israel in the day
that he came up out of the land of Egypt. 12:1 And in that day thou shalt say, O LORD, I will praise thee:
though thou wast angry with me, thine anger is turned away, and thou
comfortedst me. 12:2 Behold, God is my salvation; I will trust, and not be afraid: for
the LORD JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; he also is become my
salvation. 12:3 Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of
salvation. 12:4 And in that day shall ye say, Praise the LORD, call upon his
name, declare his doings among the people, make mention that his name
is exalted. 12:5 Sing unto the LORD; for he hath done excellent things: this is
known in all the earth. 12:6 Cry out and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion: for great is the Holy
One of Israel in the midst of thee. 13:1 The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see. 13:2 Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain, exalt the voice unto
them, shake the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles. 13:3 I have commanded my sanctified ones, I have also called my mighty
ones for mine anger, even them that rejoice in my highness. 13:4 The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great
people; a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered
together: the LORD of hosts mustereth the host of the battle. 13:5 They come from a far country, from the end of heaven, even the
LORD, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land. 13:6 Howl ye; for the day of the LORD is at hand; it shall come as a
destruction from the Almighty. 13:7 Therefore shall all hands be faint, and every man's heart shall
melt: 13:8 And they shall be afraid: pangs and sorrows shall take hold
of them; they shall be in pain as a woman that travaileth: they shall
be amazed one at another; their faces shall be as flames. 13:9 Behold, the day of the LORD cometh, cruel both with wrath and
fierce anger, to lay the land desolate: and he shall destroy the
sinners thereof out of it. 13:10 For the stars of heaven and the constellations thereof shall not
give their light: the sun shall be darkened in his going forth, and
the moon shall not cause her light to shine. 13:11 And I will punish the world for their evil, and the wicked for
their iniquity; and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease,
and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible. 13:12 I will make a man more precious than fine gold; even a man than
the golden wedge of Ophir. 13:13 Therefore I will shake the heavens, and the earth shall remove
out of her place, in the wrath of the LORD of hosts, and in the day of
his fierce anger. 13:14 And it shall be as the chased roe, and as a sheep that no man
taketh up: they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee every
one into his own land. 13:15 Every one that is found shall be thrust through; and every one
that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword. 13:16 Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes;
their houses shall be spoiled, and their wives ravished. 13:17 Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not
regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight in it. 13:18 Their bows also shall dash the young men to pieces; and they
shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eyes shall not
spare children. 13:19 And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldees'
excellency, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah. 13:20 It shall never be inhabited, neither shall it be dwelt in from
generation to generation: neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there;
neither shall the shepherds make their fold there. 13:21 But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there; and their houses
shall be full of doleful creatures; and owls shall dwell there, and
satyrs shall dance there. 13:22 And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate
houses, and dragons in their pleasant palaces: and her time is near to
come, and her days shall not be prolonged. 14:1 For the LORD will have mercy on Jacob, and will yet choose
Israel, and set them in their own land: and the strangers shall be
joined with them, and they shall cleave to the house of Jacob. 14:2 And the people shall take them, and bring them to their place:
and the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of the LORD for
servants and handmaids: and they shall take them captives, whose
captives they were; and they shall rule over their oppressors. 14:3 And it shall come to pass in the day that the LORD shall give
thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy fear, and from the hard
bondage wherein thou wast made to serve, 14:4 That thou shalt take up
this proverb against the king of Babylon, and say, How hath the
oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased! 14:5 The LORD hath broken
the staff of the wicked, and the sceptre of the rulers. 14:6 He who smote the people in wrath with a continual stroke, he that
ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted, and none hindereth. 14:7 The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet: they break forth into
singing. 14:8 Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon,
saying, Since thou art laid down, no feller is come up against us. 14:9 Hell from beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming:
it stirreth up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the
earth; it hath raised up from their thrones all the kings of the
nations. 14:10 All they shall speak and say unto thee, Art thou also become
weak as we? art thou become like unto us? 14:11 Thy pomp is brought
down to the grave, and the noise of thy viols: the worm is spread
under thee, and the worms cover thee. 14:12 How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning! how art thou cut down to the ground, which didst weaken the nations! 14:13 For thou hast said in thine heart, I will ascend into heaven, I
will exalt my throne above the stars of God: I will sit also upon the
mount of the congregation, in the sides of the north: 14:14 I will
ascend above the heights of the clouds; I will be like the most High. 14:15 Yet thou shalt be brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit. 14:16 They that see thee shall narrowly look upon thee, and consider
thee, saying, Is this the man that made the earth to tremble, that did
shake kingdoms; 14:17 That made the world as a wilderness, and
destroyed the cities thereof; that opened not the house of his
prisoners? 14:18 All the kings of the nations, even all of them, lie
in glory, every one in his own house. 14:19 But thou art cast out of thy grave like an abominable branch,
and as the raiment of those that are slain, thrust through with a
sword, that go down to the stones of the pit; as a carcase trodden
under feet. 14:20 Thou shalt not be joined with them in burial, because thou hast
destroyed thy land, and slain thy people: the seed of evildoers shall
never be renowned. 14:21 Prepare slaughter for his children for the iniquity of their
fathers; that they do not rise, nor possess the land, nor fill the
face of the world with cities. 14:22 For I will rise up against them, saith the LORD of hosts, and
cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son, and nephew, saith
the LORD. 14:23 I will also make it a possession for the bittern, and pools of
water: and I will sweep it with the besom of destruction, saith the
LORD of hosts. 14:24 The LORD of hosts hath sworn, saying, Surely as I have thought,
so shall it come to pass; and as I have purposed, so shall it stand:
14:25 That I will break the Assyrian in my land, and upon my mountains
tread him under foot: then shall his yoke depart from off them, and
his burden depart from off their shoulders. 14:26 This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth: and
this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations. 14:27 For the LORD of hosts hath purposed, and who shall disannul it? and his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back? 14:28 In
the year that king Ahaz died was this burden. 14:29 Rejoice not thou, whole Palestina, because the rod of him that
smote thee is broken: for out of the serpent's root shall come forth a
cockatrice, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent. 14:30 And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall
lie down in safety: and I will kill thy root with famine, and he shall
slay thy remnant. 14:31 Howl, O gate; cry, O city; thou, whole Palestina, art dissolved:
for there shall come from the north a smoke, and none shall be alone
in his appointed times. 14:32 What shall one then answer the messengers of the nation? That
the LORD hath founded Zion, and the poor of his people shall trust in
it. 15:1 The burden of Moab. Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid
waste, and brought to silence; because in the night Kir of Moab is
laid waste, and brought to silence; 15:2 He is gone up to Bajith, and
to Dibon, the high places, to weep: Moab shall howl over Nebo, and
over Medeba: on all their heads shall be baldness, and every beard cut
off. 15:3 In their streets they shall gird themselves with sackcloth: on
the tops of their houses, and in their streets, every one shall howl,
weeping abundantly. 15:4 And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh: their voice shall be heard
even unto Jahaz: therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out;
his life shall be grievous unto him. 15:5 My heart shall cry out for Moab; his fugitives shall flee unto
Zoar, an heifer of three years old: for by the mounting up of Luhith
with weeping shall they go it up; for in the way of Horonaim they
shall raise up a cry of destruction. 15:6 For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate: for the hay is
withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green thing. 15:7 Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they
have laid up, shall they carry away to the brook of the willows. 15:8 For the cry is gone round about the borders of Moab; the howling
thereof unto Eglaim, and the howling thereof unto Beerelim. 15:9 For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood: for I will bring
more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the
remnant of the land. 16:1 Send ye the lamb to the ruler of the land from Sela to the
wilderness, unto the mount of the daughter of Zion. 16:2 For it shall be, that, as a wandering bird cast out of the nest,
so the daughters of Moab shall be at the fords of Arnon. 16:3 Take counsel, execute judgment; make thy shadow as the night in
the midst of the noonday; hide the outcasts; bewray not him that
wandereth. 16:4 Let mine outcasts dwell with thee, Moab; be thou a covert to them
from the face of the spoiler: for the extortioner is at an end, the
spoiler ceaseth, the oppressors are consumed out of the land. 16:5 And in mercy shall the throne be established: and he shall sit
upon it in truth in the tabernacle of David, judging, and seeking
judgment, and hasting righteousness. 16:6 We have heard of the pride of Moab; he is very proud: even of his
haughtiness, and his pride, and his wrath: but his lies shall not be
so. 16:7 Therefore shall Moab howl for Moab, every one shall howl: for the
foundations of Kirhareseth shall ye mourn; surely they are stricken. 16:8 For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah: the
lords of the heathen have broken down the principal plants thereof,
they are come even unto Jazer, they wandered through the wilderness:
her branches are stretched out, they are gone over the sea. 16:9 Therefore I will bewail with the weeping of Jazer the vine of
Sibmah: I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh: for
the shouting for thy summer fruits and for thy harvest is fallen. 16:10 And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the plentiful field;
and in the vineyards there shall be no singing, neither shall there be
shouting: the treaders shall tread out no wine in their presses; I
have made their vintage shouting to cease. 16:11 Wherefore my bowels shall sound like an harp for Moab, and mine
inward parts for Kirharesh. 16:12 And it shall come to pass, when it is seen that Moab is weary on
the high place, that he shall come to his sanctuary to pray; but he
shall not prevail. 16:13 This is the word that the LORD hath spoken concerning Moab since
that time. 16:14 But now the LORD hath spoken, saying, Within three years, as the
years of an hireling, and the glory of Moab shall be contemned, with
all that great multitude; and the remnant shall be very small and
feeble. 17:1 The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being
a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap. 17:2 The cities of Aroer are forsaken: they shall be for flocks, which
shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid. 17:3 The fortress also shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from
Damascus, and the remnant of Syria: they shall be as the glory of the
children of Israel, saith the LORD of hosts. 17:4 And in that day it shall come to pass, that the glory of Jacob
shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall wax lean. 17:5 And it shall be as when the harvestman gathereth the corn, and
reapeth the ears with his arm; and it shall be as he that gathereth
ears in the valley of Rephaim. 17:6 Yet gleaning grapes shall be left in it, as the shaking of an
olive tree, two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough,
four or five in the outmost fruitful branches thereof, saith the LORD
God of Israel. 17:7 At that day shall a man look to his Maker, and his eyes shall
have respect to the Holy One of Israel. 17:8 And he shall not look to the altars, the work of his hands,
neither shall respect that which his fingers have made, either the
groves, or the images. 17:9 In that day shall his strong cities be as a forsaken bough, and
an uppermost branch, which they left because of the children of
Israel: and there shall be desolation. 17:10 Because thou hast forgotten the God of thy salvation, and hast
not been mindful of the rock of thy strength, therefore shalt thou
plant pleasant plants, and shalt set it with strange slips: 17:11 In
the day shalt thou make thy plant to grow, and in the morning shalt
thou make thy seed to flourish: but the harvest shall be a heap in the
day of grief and of desperate sorrow. 17:12 Woe to the multitude of many people, which make a noise like the
noise of the seas; and to the rushing of nations, that make a rushing
like the rushing of mighty waters! 17:13 The nations shall rush like
the rushing of many waters: but God shall rebuke them, and they shall
flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before
the wind, and like a rolling thing before the whirlwind. 17:14 And behold at eveningtide trouble; and before the morning he is
not. This is the portion of them that spoil us, and the lot of them that
rob us. 18:1 Woe to the land shadowing with wings, which is beyond the rivers
of Ethiopia: 18:2 That sendeth ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels
of bulrushes upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a
nation scattered and peeled, to a people terrible from their beginning
hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden down, whose land the rivers
have spoiled! 18:3 All ye inhabitants of the world, and dwellers on
the earth, see ye, when he lifteth up an ensign on the mountains; and
when he bloweth a trumpet, hear ye. 18:4 For so the LORD said unto me, I will take my rest, and I will
consider in my dwelling place like a clear heat upon herbs, and like a
cloud of dew in the heat of harvest. 18:5 For afore the harvest, when the bud is perfect, and the sour
grape is ripening in the flower, he shall both cut off the sprigs with
pruning hooks, and take away and cut down the branches. 18:6 They shall be left together unto the fowls of the mountains, and
to the beasts of the earth: and the fowls shall summer upon them, and
all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them. 18:7 In that time shall the present be brought unto the LORD of hosts
of a people scattered and peeled, and from a people terrible from
their beginning hitherto; a nation meted out and trodden under foot,
whose land the rivers have spoiled, to the place of the name of the
LORD of hosts, the mount Zion. 19:1 The burden of Egypt. Behold, the LORD rideth upon a swift cloud,
and shall come into Egypt: and the idols of Egypt shall be moved at
his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it. 19:2 And I will set the Egyptians against the Egyptians: and they
shall fight every one against his brother, and every one against his
neighbour; city against city, and kingdom against kingdom. 19:3 And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst thereof; and I
will destroy the counsel thereof: and they shall seek to the idols,
and to the charmers, and to them that have familiar spirits, and to
the wizards. 19:4 And the Egyptians will I give over into the hand of a cruel lord;
and a fierce king shall rule over them, saith the Lord, the LORD of
hosts. 19:5 And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be
wasted and dried up. 19:6 And they shall turn the rivers far away; and the brooks of
defence shall be emptied and dried up: the reeds and flags shall
wither. 19:7 The paper reeds by the brooks, by the mouth of the brooks, and
every thing sown by the brooks, shall wither, be driven away, and be
no more. 19:8 The fishers also shall mourn, and all they that cast angle into
the brooks shall lament, and they that spread nets upon the waters
shall languish.