By and by, another day, Epaminondas went to see his Auntie again, and;
this time she gave him a little new puppy-dog to take home. Epaminondas put it in some leaves and took it down to the brook; and
there he cooled it in the water, and cooled it in the water, and cooled
it in the water; then he took it in his hands and came along home. When
he got home, the puppy-dog was dead. His Mammy looked at it, and she
said,--

"Law's sake! Epaminondas, what you got there?" "A puppy-dog, Mammy," said Epaminondas. "A _puppy-dog_!" said his Mammy. "My gracious sakes alive, Epaminondas,
you ain't got the sense you was born with! That ain't the way to carry a
puppy-dog! The way to carry a puppy-dog is to take a long piece of
string and tie one end of it round the puppy-dog's neck and put the
puppy-dog on the ground, and take hold of the other end of the string
and come along home, like this." "All right, Mammy," said Epaminondas. Next day Epaminondas went to see his Auntie again, and when he came to
go home she gave him a loaf of bread to carry to his Mammy; a brown,
fresh, crusty loaf of bread. So Epaminondas tied a string around the end of the loaf and took hold of
the end of the string and came along home, like this. (Imitate dragging
something along the ground.) When he got home his Mammy looked at the
thing on the end of the string, and she said,--

"My laws a-massy! Epaminondas, what you got on the end of that string?" "Bread, Mammy," said Epaminondas; "Auntie gave it to me." "Bread!!!" said his Mammy. "O Epaminondas, Epaminondas, you ain't got
the sense you was born with; you never did have the sense you was born
with; you never will have the sense you was born with! Now I ain't gwine
tell you any more ways to bring truck home. And don't you go see your
Auntie, neither. I'll go see her my own self. But I'll just tell you one
thing, Epaminondas! You see these here six mince pies I done make? You
see how I done set 'em on the doorstep to cool? Well, now, you hear me,
Epaminondas, _you be careful how you step on those pies_!" "Yes, Mammy," said Epaminondas. Then Epaminondas' Mammy put on her bonnet and her shawl and took a
basket in her hand and went away to see Auntie. The six mince pies sat
cooling in a row on the doorstep. And then,--and then,--Epaminondas _was_ careful how he stepped on those
pies! He stepped (imitate)--right--in--the--middle--of--every--one. *       *       *       *       *

And, do you know, children, nobody knows what happened next! The person
who told me the story didn't know; nobody knows. But you can guess. THE BOY WHO CRIED "WOLF!" There was once a shepherd-boy who kept his flock at a little distance
from the village. Once he thought he would play a trick on the villagers
and have some fun at their expense. So he ran toward the village crying
out, with all his might,--

"Wolf! Wolf! Come and help! The wolves are at my lambs!" The kind villagers left their work and ran to the field to help him. But
when they got there the boy laughed at them for their pains; there was
no wolf there. Still another day the boy tried the same trick, and the villagers came
running to help and got laughed at again. Then one day a wolf did break into the fold and began killing the lambs. In great fright, the boy ran for help. "Wolf! Wolf!" he screamed. "There
is a wolf in the flock! Help!" The villagers heard him, but they thought it was another mean trick; no
one paid the least attention, or went near him. And the shepherd-boy
lost all his sheep. That is the kind of thing that happens to people who lie: even when they
tell the truth no one believes them. THE FROG KING


Did you ever hear the old story about the foolish Frogs? The Frogs in a
certain swamp decided that they needed a king; they had always got along
perfectly well without one, but they suddenly made up their minds that a
king they must have. They sent a messenger to Jove and begged him to
send a king to rule over them. Jove saw how stupid they were, and sent a king who could not harm them:
he tossed a big log into the middle of the pond. At the splash the Frogs were terribly frightened, and dived into their
holes to hide from King Log. But after a while, when they saw that the
king never moved, they got over their fright and went and sat on him. And as soon as they found he really could not hurt them they began to
despise him; and finally they sent another messenger to Jove to ask for
a new king. Jove sent an eel. The Frogs were much pleased and a good deal frightened when King Eel
came wriggling and swimming among them. But as the days went on, and the
eel was perfectly harmless, they stopped being afraid; and as soon as
they stopped fearing King Eel they stopped respecting him. Soon they sent a third messenger to Jove, and begged that they might
have a better king,--a king who was worth while. It was too much; Jove was angry at their stupidity at last. "I will give
you a king such as you deserve!" he said; and he sent them a Stork. As soon as the Frogs came to the surface to greet the new king, King
Stork caught them in his long bill and gobbled them up. One after
another they came bobbing up, and one after another the stork ate them. He was indeed a king worthy of them! THE SUN AND THE WIND


The Sun and the Wind once had a quarrel as to which was the stronger. Each believed himself to be the more powerful. While they were arguing
they saw a traveller walking along the country highway, wearing a great
cloak. "Here is a chance to test our strength," said the Wind; "let us see
which of us is strong enough to make that traveller take off his cloak;
the one who can do that shall be acknowledged the more powerful." "Agreed," said the Sun. Instantly the Wind began to blow; he puffed and tugged at the man's
cloak, and raised a storm of hail and rain, to beat at it. But the
colder it grew and the more it stormed, the tighter the traveller held
his cloak around him. The Wind could not get it off. Now it was the Sun's turn. He shone with all his beams on the man's
shoulders. As it grew hotter and hotter, the man unfastened his cloak;
then he threw it back; at last he took it off! The Sun had won. THE LITTLE JACKAL AND THE ALLIGATOR


The little Jackal was very fond of shell-fish. He used to go down by the
river and hunt along the edges for crabs and such things. And once, when
he was hunting for crabs, he was so hungry that he put his paw into the
water after a crab without looking first,--which you never should do! The minute he put in his paw, _snap_!--the big Alligator who lives in
the mud down there had it in his jaws. "Oh, dear!" thought the little Jackal; "the big Alligator has my paw in
his mouth! In another minute he will pull me down and gobble me up! What
shall I do? what shall I do?" Then he thought, suddenly, "I'll deceive
him!" So he put on a very cheerful voice, as if nothing at all were the
matter, and he said,--

"Ho! ho! Clever Mr Alligator! Smart Mr Alligator, to take that old
bulrush root for my paw! I hope you'll find it very tender!"