It would easily have made
him beautiful if he had been merely squalid; if he had been a Jew
of the Fagin type. But he was a Jew of another and much less
admirable type; a Jew with a very well-sounding name. For though
there are no hard tests for separating the tares and the wheat of
any people, one rude but efficient guide is that the nice Jew is
called Moses Solomon, and the nasty Jew is called Thornton Percy. The keeper of the curiosity shop was of the Thornton Percy branch
of the chosen people; he belonged to those Lost Ten Tribes whose
industrious object is to lose themselves. He was a man still
young, but already corpulent, with sleek dark hair, heavy
handsome clothes, and a full, fat, permanent smile, which looked
at the first glance kindly, and at the second cowardly. The name
over his shop was Henry Gordon, but two Scotchmen who were in his
shop that evening could come upon no trace of a Scotch accent. These two Scotchmen in this shop were careful purchasers, but
free-handed payers. One of them who seemed to be the principal
and the authority (whom, indeed, Mr. Henry Gordon fancied he had
seen somewhere before), was a small, sturdy fellow, with fine
grey eyes, a square red tie and a square red beard, that he
carried aggressively forward as if he defied anyone to pull it. The other kept so much in the background in comparison that he
looked almost ghostly in his grey cloak or plaid, a tall, sallow,
silent young man. The two Scotchmen were interested in seventeenth-century swords. They were fastidious about them. They had a whole armoury of
these weapons brought out and rolled clattering about the
counter, until they found two of precisely the same length. Presumably they desired the exact symmetry for some decorative
trophy. Even then they felt the points, poised the swords for
balance and bent them in a circle to see that they sprang
straight again; which, for decorative purposes, seems carrying
realism rather far. "These will do," said the strange person with the red beard. "And perhaps I had better pay for them at once. And as you are
the challenger, Mr. MacIan, perhaps you had better explain the
situation." The tall Scotchman in grey took a step forward and spoke in a
voice quite clear and bold, and yet somehow lifeless, like a man
going through an ancient formality. "The fact is, Mr. Gordon, we have to place our honour in your
hands. Words have passed between Mr. Turnbull and myself on a
grave and invaluable matter, which can only be atoned for by
fighting. Unfortunately, as the police are in some sense pursuing
us, we are hurried, and must fight now and without seconds. But
if you will be so kind as to take us into your little garden and
see far play, we shall feel how----"

The shopman recovered himself from a stunning surprise and burst
out:

"Gentlemen, are you drunk? A duel! A duel in my garden. Go
home, gentlemen, go home. Why, what did you quarrel about?" "We quarrelled," said Evan, in the same dead voice, "about
religion." The fat shopkeeper rolled about in his chair with
enjoyment. "Well, this is a funny game," he said. "So you want to commit
murder on behalf of religion. Well, well my religion is a little
respect for humanity, and----"

"Excuse me," cut in Turnbull, suddenly and fiercely, pointing
towards the pawnbroker's next door. "Don't you own that shop?" "Why--er--yes," said Gordon. "And don't you own that shop?" repeated the secularist, pointing
backward to the pornographic bookseller. "What if I do?" "Why, then," cried Turnbull, with grating contempt. "I will leave
the religion of humanity confidently in your hands; but I am
sorry I troubled you about such a thing as honour. Look here, my
man. I do believe in humanity. I do believe in liberty. My father
died for it under the swords of the Yeomanry. I am going to die
for it, if need be, under that sword on your counter. But if
there is one sight that makes me doubt it it is your foul fat
face. It is hard to believe you were not meant to be ruled like a
dog or killed like a cockroach. Don't try your slave's philosophy
on me. We are going to fight, and we are going to fight in your
garden, with your swords. Be still! Raise your voice above a
whisper, and I run you through the body." Turnbull put the bright point of the sword against the gay
waistcoat of the dealer, who stood choking with rage and fear,
and an astonishment so crushing as to be greater than either. "MacIan," said Turnbull, falling almost into the familiar tone of
a business partner, "MacIan, tie up this fellow and put a gag in
his mouth. Be still, I say, or I kill you where you stand." The man was too frightened to scream, but he struggled wildly,
while Evan MacIan, whose long, lean hands were unusually
powerful, tightened some old curtain cords round him, strapped a
rope gag in his mouth and rolled him on his back on the floor. "There's nothing very strong here," said Evan, looking about him. "I'm afraid he'll work through that gag in half an hour or so." "Yes," said Turnbull, "but one of us will be killed by that
time." "Well, let's hope so," said the Highlander, glancing doubtfully
at the squirming thing on the floor. "And now," said Turnbull, twirling his fiery moustache and
fingering his sword, "let us go into the garden. What an
exquisite summer evening!" MacIan said nothing, but lifting his sword from the counter went
out into the sun. The brilliant light ran along the blades, filling the channels of
them with white fire; the combatants stuck their swords in the
turf and took off their hats, coats, waistcoats, and boots. Evan
said a short Latin prayer to himself, during which Turnbull made
something of a parade of lighting a cigarette which he flung away
the instant after, when he saw MacIan apparently standing ready. Yet MacIan was not exactly ready. He stood staring like a man
stricken with a trance. "What are you staring at?" asked Turnbull. "Do you see the
bobbies?" "I see Jerusalem," said Evan, "all covered with the shields and
standards of the Saracens." "Jerusalem!" said Turnbull, laughing. "Well, we've taken the only
inhabitant into captivity." And he picked up his sword and made it whistle like a boy's wand. "I beg your pardon," said MacIan, dryly. "Let us begin." MacIan made a military salute with his weapon, which Turnbull
copied or parodied with an impatient contempt; and in the
stillness of the garden the swords came together with a clear
sound like a bell. The instant the blades touched, each felt them
tingle to their very points with a personal vitality, as if they
were two naked nerves of steel. Evan had worn throughout an air
of apathy, which might have been the stale apathy of one who
wants nothing. But it was indeed the more dreadful apathy of one
who wants something and will care for nothing else. And this was
seen suddenly; for the instant Evan engaged he disengaged and
lunged with an infernal violence. His opponent with a desperate
promptitude parried and riposted; the parry only just succeeded,
the riposte failed. Something big and unbearable seemed to have
broken finally out of Evan in that first murderous lunge, leaving
him lighter and cooler and quicker upon his feet. He fell to
again, fiercely still, but now with a fierce caution. The next
moment Turnbull lunged; MacIan seemed to catch the point and
throw it away from him, and was thrusting back like a
thunderbolt, when a sound paralysed him; another sound beside
their ringing weapons. Turnbull, perhaps from an equal
astonishment, perhaps from chivalry, stopped also and forebore to
send his sword through his exposed enemy. "What's that?" asked Evan, hoarsely. A heavy scraping sound, as of a trunk being dragged along a
littered floor, came from the dark shop behind them. "The old Jew has broken one of his strings, and he's crawling
about," said Turnbull. "Be quick! We must finish before he gets
his gag out." "Yes, yes, quick! On guard!" cried the Highlander. The blades
crossed again with the same sound like song, and the men went to
work again with the same white and watchful faces. Evan, in his
impatience, went back a little to his wildness. He made
windmills, as the French duellists say, and though he was
probably a shade the better fencer of the two, he found the
other's point pass his face twice so close as almost to graze his
cheek. The second time he realized the actual possibility of
defeat and pulled himself together under a shock of the sanity of
anger. He narrowed, and, so to speak, tightened his operations:
he fenced (as the swordsman's boast goes), in a wedding ring; he
turned Turnbull's thrusts with a maddening and almost mechanical
click, like that of a machine. Whenever Turnbull's sword sought
to go over that other mere white streak it seemed to be caught in
a complex network of steel. He turned one thrust, turned another,
turned another.