Boy, Lucius, Varrus, Claudio, Sirs: Awake:
Claudio

   Luc. The strings my Lord, are false

   Bru. He thinkes he still is at his Instrument. Lucius, awake

   Luc. My Lord

   Bru. Did'st thou dreame Lucius, that thou so cryedst
out? Luc. My Lord, I do not know that I did cry

   Bru. Yes that thou did'st: Did'st thou see any thing? Luc. Nothing my Lord

   Bru. Sleepe againe Lucius: Sirra Claudio, Fellow,
Thou: Awake

   Var. My Lord

   Clau. My Lord

   Bru. Why did you so cry out sirs, in your sleepe? Both. Did we my Lord? Bru. I: saw you any thing? Var. No my Lord, I saw nothing

   Clau. Nor I my Lord

   Bru. Go, and commend me to my Brother Cassius:
Bid him set on his Powres betimes before,
And we will follow

   Both. It shall be done my Lord. Exeunt. Actus Quintus. Enter Octauius, Antony, and their Army. Octa. Now Antony, our hopes are answered,
You said the Enemy would not come downe,
But keepe the Hilles and vpper Regions:
It proues not so: their battailes are at hand,
They meane to warne vs at Philippi heere:
Answering before we do demand of them

   Ant. Tut I am in their bosomes, and I know
Wherefore they do it: They could be content
To visit other places, and come downe
With fearefull brauery: thinking by this face
To fasten in our thoughts that they haue Courage;
But 'tis not so. Enter a Messenger. Mes. Prepare you Generals,
The Enemy comes on in gallant shew:
Their bloody signe of Battell is hung out,
And something to be done immediately

   Ant. Octauius, leade your Battaile softly on
Vpon the left hand of the euen Field

   Octa. Vpon the right hand I, keepe thou the left

   Ant. Why do you crosse me in this exigent

   Octa. I do not crosse you: but I will do so. March. Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius, & their Army. Bru. They stand, and would haue parley

   Cassi. Stand fast Titinius, we must out and talke

   Octa. Mark Antony, shall we giue signe of Battaile? Ant. No Caesar, we will answer on their Charge. Make forth, the Generals would haue some words

   Oct. Stirre not vntill the Signall

   Bru. Words before blowes: is it so Countrymen? Octa. Not that we loue words better, as you do

   Bru. Good words are better then bad strokes Octauius

   An. In your bad strokes Brutus, you giue good words
Witnesse the hole you made in Caesars heart,
Crying long liue, Haile Caesar

   Cassi. Antony,
The posture of your blowes are yet vnknowne;
But for your words, they rob the Hibla Bees,
And leaue them Hony-lesse

   Ant. Not stinglesse too

   Bru. O yes, and soundlesse too:
For you haue stolne their buzzing Antony,
And very wisely threat before you sting

   Ant. Villains: you did not so, when your vile daggers
Hackt one another in the sides of Caesar:
You shew'd your teethes like Apes,
And fawn'd like Hounds,
And bow'd like Bondmen, kissing Caesars feete;
Whil'st damned Caska, like a Curre, behinde
Strooke Caesar on the necke. O you Flatterers

   Cassi. Flatterers? Now Brutus thanke your selfe,
This tongue had not offended so to day. If Cassius might haue rul'd

   Octa. Come, come, the cause. If arguing make vs swet,
The proofe of it will turne to redder drops:
Looke, I draw a Sword against Conspirators,
When thinke you that the Sword goes vp againe? Neuer till Caesars three and thirtie wounds
Be well aueng'd; or till another Caesar
Haue added slaughter to the Sword of Traitors

   Brut. Caesar, thou canst not dye by Traitors hands. Vnlesse thou bring'st them with thee

   Octa. So I hope:
I was not borne to dye on Brutus Sword

   Bru. O if thou wer't the Noblest of thy Straine,
Yong-man, thou could'st not dye more honourable

   Cassi. A peeuish School-boy, worthles of such Honor
Ioyn'd with a Masker, and a Reueller

   Ant. Old Cassius still

   Octa. Come Antony: away:
Defiance Traitors, hurle we in your teeth. If you dare fight to day, come to the Field;
If not, when you haue stomackes. Exit Octauius, Antony, and Army

  Cassi. Why now blow winde, swell Billow,
And swimme Barke:
The Storme is vp, and all is on the hazard

   Bru. Ho Lucillius, hearke, a word with you. Lucillius and Messala stand forth. Luc. My Lord

   Cassi. Messala

   Messa. What sayes my Generall? Cassi. Messala, this is my Birth-day: at this very day
Was Cassius borne. Giue me thy hand Messala:
Be thou my witnesse, that against my will
(As Pompey was) am I compell'd to set
Vpon one Battell all our Liberties. You know, that I held Epicurus strong,
And his Opinion: Now I change my minde,
And partly credit things that do presage. Comming from Sardis, on our former Ensigne
Two mighty Eagles fell, and there they pearch'd,
Gorging and feeding from our Soldiers hands,
Who to Philippi heere consorted vs:
This Morning are they fled away, and gone,
And in their steeds, do Rauens, Crowes, and Kites
Fly ore our heads, and downward looke on vs
As we were sickely prey; their shadowes seeme
A Canopy most fatall, vnder which
Our Army lies, ready to giue vp the Ghost

   Messa. Beleeue not so

   Cassi. I but beleeue it partly,
For I am fresh of spirit, and resolu'd
To meete all perils, very constantly

   Bru. Euen so Lucillius

   Cassi. Now most Noble Brutus,
The Gods to day stand friendly, that we may
Louers in peace, leade on our dayes to age. But since the affayres of men rests still incertaine,
Let's reason with the worst that may befall. If we do lose this Battaile, then is this
The very last time we shall speake together:
What are you then determined to do? Bru. Euen by the rule of that Philosophy,
By which I did blame Cato, for the death
Which he did giue himselfe, I know not how:
But I do finde it Cowardly, and vile,
For feare of what might fall, so to preuent
The time of life, arming my selfe with patience,
To stay the prouidence of some high Powers,
That gouerne vs below

   Cassi. Then, if we loose this Battaile,
You are contented to be led in Triumph
Thorow the streets of Rome

   Bru. No Cassius, no:
Thinke not thou Noble Romane,
That euer Brutus will go bound to Rome,
He beares too great a minde. But this same day
Must end that worke, the Ides of March begun. And whether we shall meete againe, I know not:
Therefore our euerlasting farewell take:
For euer, and for euer, farewell Cassius,
If we do meete againe, why we shall smile;
If not, why then this parting was well made

   Cassi. For euer, and for euer, farewell Brutus:
If we do meete againe, wee'l smile indeede;
If not, 'tis true, this parting was well made

   Bru. Why then leade on. O that a man might know
The end of this dayes businesse, ere it come:
But it sufficeth, that the day will end,
And then the end is knowne. Come ho, away.