But wherefore all night long shine these? for whom 
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes? To whom our general ancestor replied. Daughter of God and Man, accomplished Eve, 
These have their course to finish round the earth, 
By morrow evening, and from land to land 
In order, though to nations yet unborn, 
Ministring light prepared, they set and rise; 
Lest total Darkness should by night regain 
Her old possession, and extinguish life 
In Nature and all things; which these soft fires 
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat 
Of various influence foment and warm, 
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down 
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow 
On earth, made hereby apter to receive 
Perfection from the sun's more potent ray. These then, though unbeheld in deep of night, 
Shine not in vain; nor think, though men were none, 
That Heaven would want spectators, God want praise: 
Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth 
Unseen, both when we wake, and when we sleep: 
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold 
Both day and night:  How often from the steep 
Of echoing hill or thicket have we heard 
Celestial voices to the midnight air, 
Sole, or responsive each to others note, 
Singing their great Creator? oft in bands 
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk, 
With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds 
In full harmonick number joined, their songs 
Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to Heaven. Thus talking, hand in hand alone they passed 
On to their blissful bower: it was a place 
Chosen by the sovran Planter, when he framed 
All things to Man's delightful use; the roof 
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade 
Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew 
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side 
Acanthus, and each odorous bushy shrub, 
Fenced up the verdant wall; each beauteous flower, 
Iris all hues, roses, and jessamin, 
Reared high their flourished heads between, and wrought 
Mosaick; underfoot the violet, 
Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay 
Broidered the ground, more coloured than with stone 
Of costliest emblem:  Other creature here, 
Bird, beast, insect, or worm, durst enter none, 
Such was their awe of Man. In shadier bower 
More sacred and sequestered, though but feigned, 
Pan or Sylvanus never slept, nor Nymph 
Nor Faunus haunted. Here, in close recess, 
With flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs, 
Espoused Eve decked first her nuptial bed; 
And heavenly quires the hymenaean sung, 
What day the genial Angel to our sire 
Brought her in naked beauty more adorned, 
More lovely, than Pandora, whom the Gods 
Endowed with all their gifts, and O! too like 
In sad event, when to the unwiser son 
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnared 
Mankind with her fair looks, to be avenged 
On him who had stole Jove's authentick fire. Thus, at their shady lodge arrived, both stood, 
Both turned, and under open sky adored 
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and heaven, 
Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe, 
And starry pole:  Thou also madest the night, 
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the day, 
Which we, in our appointed work employed, 
Have finished, happy in our mutual help 
And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss 
Ordained by thee; and this delicious place 
For us too large, where thy abundance wants 
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground. But thou hast promised from us two a race 
To fill the earth, who shall with us extol 
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake, 
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep. This said unanimous, and other rites 
Observing none, but adoration pure 
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower 
Handed they went; and, eased the putting off 
These troublesome disguises which we wear, 
Straight side by side were laid; nor turned, I ween, 
Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites 
Mysterious of connubial love refused: 
Whatever hypocrites austerely talk 
Of purity, and place, and innocence, 
Defaming as impure what God declares 
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all. Our Maker bids encrease; who bids abstain 
But our Destroyer, foe to God and Man? Hail, wedded Love, mysterious law, true source 
Of human offspring, sole propriety 
In Paradise of all things common else! By thee adulterous Lust was driven from men 
Among the bestial herds to range; by thee 
Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure, 
Relations dear, and all the charities 
Of father, son, and brother, first were known. Far be it, that I should write thee sin or blame, 
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place, 
Perpetual fountain of domestick sweets, 
Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced, 
Present, or past, as saints and patriarchs used. Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights 
His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings, 
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile 
Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendeared, 
Casual fruition; nor in court-amours, 
Mixed dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball, 
Or serenate, which the starved lover sings 
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain. These, lulled by nightingales, embracing slept, 
And on their naked limbs the flowery roof 
Showered roses, which the morn repaired. Sleep on, 
Blest pair; and O!yet happiest, if ye seek 
No happier state, and know to know no more. Now had night measured with her shadowy cone 
Half way up hill this vast sublunar vault, 
And from their ivory port the Cherubim, 
Forth issuing at the accustomed hour, stood armed 
To their night watches in warlike parade; 
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake. Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the south 
With strictest watch; these other wheel the north; 
Our circuit meets full west. As flame they part, 
Half wheeling to the shield, half to the spear. From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he called 
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge. Ithuriel and Zephon, with winged speed 
Search through this garden, leave unsearched no nook; 
But chiefly where those two fair creatures lodge, 
Now laid perhaps asleep, secure of harm. This evening from the sun's decline arrived, 
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen 
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?) escaped 
The bars of Hell, on errand bad no doubt: 
Such, where ye find, seise fast, and hither bring. So saying, on he led his radiant files, 
Dazzling the moon; these to the bower direct 
In search of whom they sought:  Him there they found 
Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve, 
Assaying by his devilish art to reach 
The organs of her fancy, and with them forge 
Illusions, as he list, phantasms and dreams; 
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint 
The animal spirits, that from pure blood arise 
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise 
At least distempered, discontented thoughts, 
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires, 
Blown up with high conceits ingendering pride. Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear 
Touched lightly; for no falshood can endure 
Touch of celestial temper, but returns 
Of force to its own likeness:  Up he starts 
Discovered and surprised. As when a spark 
Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid 
Fit for the tun some magazine to store 
Against a rumoured war, the smutty grain, 
With sudden blaze diffused, inflames the air; 
So started up in his own shape the Fiend. Back stept those two fair Angels, half amazed 
So sudden to behold the grisly king; 
Yet thus, unmoved with fear, accost him soon. Which of those rebel Spirits adjudged to Hell 
Comest thou, escaped thy prison? and, transformed, 
Why sat'st thou like an enemy in wait, 
Here watching at the head of these that sleep? Know ye not then said Satan, filled with scorn, 
Know ye not me? ye knew me once no mate 
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar: 
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown, 
The lowest of your throng; or, if ye know, 
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin 
Your message, like to end as much in vain? To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn. Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same, 
Or undiminished brightness to be known, 
As when thou stoodest in Heaven upright and pure; 
That glory then, when thou no more wast good, 
Departed from thee; and thou resemblest now 
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul. But come, for thou, be sure, shalt give account 
To him who sent us, whose charge is to keep 
This place inviolable, and these from harm. So spake the Cherub; and his grave rebuke, 
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace 
Invincible:  Abashed the Devil stood, 
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw 
Virtue in her shape how lovely; saw, and pined 
His loss; but chiefly to find here observed 
His lustre visibly impaired; yet seemed 
Undaunted. If I must contend, said he, 
Best with the best, the sender, not the sent, 
Or all at once; more glory will be won, 
Or less be lost. Thy fear, said Zephon bold, 
Will save us trial what the least can do 
Single against thee wicked, and thence weak. The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage; 
But, like a proud steed reined, went haughty on, 
Champing his iron curb:  To strive or fly 
He held it vain; awe from above had quelled 
His heart, not else dismayed. Now drew they nigh 
The western point, where those half-rounding guards 
Just met, and closing stood in squadron joined, 
A waiting next command. To whom their Chief, 
Gabriel, from the front thus called aloud. O friends! I hear the tread of nimble feet 
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern 
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade; 
And with them comes a third of regal port, 
But faded splendour wan; who by his gait 
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell, 
Not likely to part hence without contest; 
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours. He scarce had ended, when those two approached, 
And brief related whom they brought, where found, 
How busied, in what form and posture couched. To whom with stern regard thus Gabriel spake. Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescribed 
To thy transgressions, and disturbed the charge 
Of others, who approve not to transgress 
By thy example, but have power and right 
To question thy bold entrance on this place; 
Employed, it seems, to violate sleep, and those 
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss! To whom thus Satan with contemptuous brow. Gabriel? thou hadst in Heaven the esteem of wise, 
And such I held thee; but this question asked 
Puts me in doubt. Lives there who loves his pain! Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell, 
Though thither doomed! Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt 
And boldly venture to whatever place 
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change 
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense 
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought; 
To thee no reason, who knowest only good, 
But evil hast not tried: and wilt object 
His will who bounds us! Let him surer bar 
His iron gates, if he intends our stay 
In that dark durance:  Thus much what was asked. The rest is true, they found me where they say; 
But that implies not violence or harm. Thus he in scorn. The warlike Angel moved, 
Disdainfully half smiling, thus replied. O loss of one in Heaven to judge of wise 
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew, 
And now returns him from his prison 'scaped, 
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise 
Or not, who ask what boldness brought him hither 
Unlicensed from his bounds in Hell prescribed; 
So wise he judges it to fly from pain 
However, and to 'scape his punishment! So judge thou still, presumptuous! till the wrath, 
Which thou incurrest by flying, meet thy flight 
Sevenfold, and scourge that wisdom back to Hell, 
Which taught thee yet no better, that no pain 
Can equal anger infinite provoked. But wherefore thou alone? wherefore with thee 
Came not all hell broke loose? or thou than they 
Less hardy to endure? Courageous Chief! The first in flight from pain! hadst thou alleged 
To thy deserted host this cause of flight, 
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive. To which the Fiend thus answered, frowning stern. Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain, 
Insulting Angel! well thou knowest I stood 
Thy fiercest, when in battle to thy aid 
The blasting vollied thunder made all speed, 
And seconded thy else not dreaded spear. But still thy words at random, as before, 
Argue thy inexperience what behoves 
From hard assays and ill successes past 
A faithful leader, not to hazard all 
Through ways of danger by himself untried: 
I, therefore, I alone first undertook 
To wing the desolate abyss, and spy 
This new created world, whereof in Hell 
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find 
Better abode, and my afflicted Powers 
To settle here on earth, or in mid air; 
Though for possession put to try once more 
What thou and thy gay legions dare against; 
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord 
High up in Heaven, with songs to hymn his throne, 
And practised distances to cringe, not fight, 
To whom the warriour Angel soon replied. To say and straight unsay, pretending first 
Wise to fly pain, professing next the spy, 
Argues no leader but a liear traced, 
Satan, and couldst thou faithful add? O name, 
O sacred name of faithfulness profaned! Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew? Army of Fiends, fit body to fit head. Was this your discipline and faith engaged, 
Your military obedience, to dissolve 
Allegiance to the acknowledged Power supreme? And thou, sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem 
Patron of liberty, who more than thou 
Once fawned, and cringed, and servily adored 
Heaven's awful Monarch? wherefore, but in hope 
To dispossess him, and thyself to reign? But mark what I arreed thee now, Avant; 
Fly neither whence thou fledst! If from this hour 
Within these hallowed limits thou appear, 
Back to the infernal pit I drag thee chained, 
And seal thee so, as henceforth not to scorn 
The facile gates of Hell too slightly barred. So threatened he; but Satan to no threats 
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage replied. Then when I am thy captive talk of chains, 
Proud limitary Cherub! but ere then 
Far heavier load thyself expect to feel 
From my prevailing arm, though Heaven's King 
Ride on thy wings, and thou with thy compeers, 
Us'd to the yoke, drawest his triumphant wheels 
In progress through the road of Heaven star-paved. While thus he spake, the angelick squadron bright 
Turned fiery red, sharpening in mooned horns 
Their phalanx, and began to hem him round 
With ported spears, as thick as when a field 
Of Ceres ripe for harvest waving bends 
Her bearded grove of ears, which way the wind 
Sways them; the careful plowman doubting stands, 
Left on the threshing floor his hopeless sheaves 
Prove chaff. On the other side, Satan, alarmed, 
Collecting all his might, dilated stood, 
Like Teneriff or Atlas, unremoved: 
His stature reached the sky, and on his crest 
Sat Horrour plumed; nor wanted in his grasp 
What seemed both spear and shield:  Now dreadful deeds 
Might have ensued, nor only Paradise 
In this commotion, but the starry cope 
Of Heaven perhaps, or all the elements 
At least had gone to wrack, disturbed and torn 
With violence of this conflict, had not soon 
The Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray, 
Hung forth in Heaven his golden scales, yet seen 
Betwixt Astrea and the Scorpion sign, 
Wherein all things created first he weighed, 
The pendulous round earth with balanced air 
In counterpoise, now ponders all events, 
Battles and realms:  In these he put two weights, 
The sequel each of parting and of fight: 
The latter quick up flew, and kicked the beam, 
Which Gabriel spying, thus bespake the Fiend. Satan, I know thy strength, and thou knowest mine; 
Neither our own, but given:  What folly then 
To boast what arms can do? since thine no more 
Than Heaven permits, nor mine, though doubled now 
To trample thee as mire:  For proof look up, 
And read thy lot in yon celestial sign; 
Where thou art weighed, and shown how light, how weak, 
If thou resist. The Fiend looked up, and knew 
His mounted scale aloft:  Nor more;but fled 
Murmuring, and with him fled the shades of night. Book V                                                           
 
 
Now Morn, her rosy steps in the eastern clime 
Advancing, sowed the earth with orient pearl, 
When Adam waked, so customed; for his sleep 
Was aery-light, from pure digestion bred, 
And temperate vapours bland, which the only sound 
Of leaves and fuming rills, Aurora's fan, 
Lightly dispersed, and the shrill matin song 
Of birds on every bough; so much the more 
His wonder was to find unwakened Eve 
With tresses discomposed, and glowing cheek, 
As through unquiet rest:  He, on his side 
Leaning half raised, with looks of cordial love 
Hung over her enamoured, and beheld 
Beauty, which, whether waking or asleep, 
Shot forth peculiar graces; then with voice 
Mild, as when Zephyrus on Flora breathes, 
Her hand soft touching, whispered thus. Awake, 
My fairest, my espoused, my latest found, 
Heaven's last best gift, my ever new delight! Awake:  The morning shines, and the fresh field 
Calls us; we lose the prime, to mark how spring 
Our tender plants, how blows the citron grove, 
What drops the myrrh, and what the balmy reed, 
How nature paints her colours, how the bee 
Sits on the bloom extracting liquid sweet. Such whispering waked her, but with startled eye 
On Adam, whom embracing, thus she spake. O sole in whom my thoughts find all repose, 
My glory, my perfection! glad I see 
Thy face, and morn returned; for I this night 
(Such night till this I never passed) have dreamed, 
If dreamed, not, as I oft am wont, of thee, 
Works of day past, or morrow's next design, 
But of offence and trouble, which my mind 
Knew never till this irksome night:  Methought, 
Close at mine ear one called me forth to walk 
With gentle voice;  I thought it thine: It said, 
'Why sleepest thou, Eve? now is the pleasant time, 
'The cool, the silent, save where silence yields 
'To the night-warbling bird, that now awake 
'Tunes sweetest his love-laboured song; now reigns 
'Full-orbed the moon, and with more pleasing light 
'Shadowy sets off the face of things; in vain, 
'If none regard; Heaven wakes with all his eyes, 
'Whom to behold but thee, Nature's desire? 'In whose sight all things joy, with ravishment 
'Attracted by thy beauty still to gaze.' I rose as at thy call, but found thee not; 
To find thee I directed then my walk; 
And on, methought, alone I passed through ways 
That brought me on a sudden to the tree 
Of interdicted knowledge: fair it seemed, 
Much fairer to my fancy than by day: 
And, as I wondering looked, beside it stood 
One shaped and winged like one of those from Heaven 
By us oft seen; his dewy locks distilled 
Ambrosia; on that tree he also gazed; 
And 'O fair plant,' said he, 'with fruit surcharged, 
'Deigns none to ease thy load, and taste thy sweet, 
'Nor God, nor Man? Is knowledge so despised? 'Or envy, or what reserve forbids to taste? 'Forbid who will, none shall from me withhold 
'Longer thy offered good; why else set here? This said, he paused not, but with venturous arm 
He plucked, he tasted; me damp horrour chilled 
At such bold words vouched with a deed so bold: 
But he thus, overjoyed; 'O fruit divine, 
'Sweet of thyself, but much more sweet thus cropt, 
'Forbidden here, it seems, as only fit 
'For Gods, yet able to make Gods of Men: 
'And why not Gods of Men; since good, the more 
'Communicated, more abundant grows, 
'The author not impaired, but honoured more? 'Here, happy creature, fair angelick Eve! 'Partake thou also; happy though thou art, 
'Happier thou mayest be, worthier canst not be: 
'Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods 
'Thyself a Goddess, not to earth confined, 
'But sometimes in the air, as we, sometimes 
'Ascend to Heaven, by merit thine, and see 
'What life the Gods live there, and such live thou!' So saying, he drew nigh, and to me held, 
Even to my mouth of that same fruit held part 
Which he had plucked; the pleasant savoury smell 
So quickened appetite, that I, methought, 
Could not but taste. Forthwith up to the clouds 
With him I flew, and underneath beheld 
The earth outstretched immense, a prospect wide 
And various:  Wondering at my flight and change 
To this high exaltation; suddenly 
My guide was gone, and I, methought, sunk down, 
And fell asleep; but O, how glad I waked 
To find this but a dream! Thus Eve her night 
Related, and thus Adam answered sad. Best image of myself, and dearer half, 
The trouble of thy thoughts this night in sleep 
Affects me equally; nor can I like 
This uncouth dream, of evil sprung, I fear; 
Yet evil whence? in thee can harbour none, 
Created pure. But know that in the soul 
Are many lesser faculties, that serve 
Reason as chief; among these Fancy next 
Her office holds; of all external things 
Which the five watchful senses represent, 
She forms imaginations, aery shapes, 
Which Reason, joining or disjoining, frames 
All what we affirm or what deny, and call 
Our knowledge or opinion; then retires 
Into her private cell, when nature rests. Oft in her absence mimick Fancy wakes 
To imitate her; but, misjoining shapes, 
Wild work produces oft, and most in dreams; 
Ill matching words and deeds long past or late. Some such resemblances, methinks, I find 
Of our last evening's talk, in this thy dream, 
But with addition strange; yet be not sad. Evil into the mind of God or Man 
May come and go, so unreproved, and leave 
No spot or blame behind:  Which gives me hope 
That what in sleep thou didst abhor to dream, 
Waking thou never will consent to do. Be not disheartened then, nor cloud those looks, 
That wont to be more cheerful and serene, 
Than when fair morning first smiles on the world; 
And let us to our fresh employments rise 
Among the groves, the fountains, and the flowers 
That open now their choisest bosomed smells, 
Reserved from night, and kept for thee in store. So cheered he his fair spouse, and she was cheered; 
But silently a gentle tear let fall 
From either eye, and wiped them with her hair; 
Two other precious drops that ready stood, 
Each in their crystal sluice, he ere they fell 
Kissed, as the gracious signs of sweet remorse 
And pious awe, that feared to have offended. So all was cleared, and to the field they haste. But first, from under shady arborous roof 
Soon as they forth were come to open sight 
Of day-spring, and the sun, who, scarce up-risen, 
With wheels yet hovering o'er the ocean-brim, 
Shot parallel to the earth his dewy ray, 
Discovering in wide landskip all the east 
Of Paradise and Eden's happy plains, 
Lowly they bowed adoring, and began 
Their orisons, each morning duly paid 
In various style; for neither various style 
Nor holy rapture wanted they to praise 
Their Maker, in fit strains pronounced, or sung 
Unmeditated; such prompt eloquence 
Flowed from their lips, in prose or numerous verse, 
More tuneable than needed lute or harp 
To add more sweetness; and they thus began. These are thy glorious works, Parent of good, 
Almighty! Thine this universal frame, 
Thus wonderous fair;  Thyself how wonderous then! Unspeakable, who sitst above these heavens 
To us invisible, or dimly seen 
In these thy lowest works; yet these declare 
Thy goodness beyond thought, and power divine. Speak, ye who best can tell, ye sons of light, 
Angels; for ye behold him, and with songs 
And choral symphonies, day without night, 
Circle his throne rejoicing; ye in Heaven 
On Earth join all ye Creatures to extol 
Him first, him last, him midst, and without end. Fairest of stars, last in the train of night, 
If better thou belong not to the dawn, 
Sure pledge of day, that crownest the smiling morn 
With thy bright circlet, praise him in thy sphere, 
While day arises, that sweet hour of prime. Thou Sun, of this great world both eye and soul, 
Acknowledge him thy greater; sound his praise 
In thy eternal course, both when thou climbest, 
And when high noon hast gained, and when thou fallest. Moon, that now meetest the orient sun, now flyest, 
With the fixed Stars, fixed in their orb that flies; 
And ye five other wandering Fires, that move 
In mystick dance not without song, resound 
His praise, who out of darkness called up light. Air, and ye Elements, the eldest birth 
Of Nature's womb, that in quaternion run 
Perpetual circle, multiform; and mix 
And nourish all things; let your ceaseless change 
Vary to our great Maker still new praise. Ye Mists and Exhalations, that now rise 
From hill or steaming lake, dusky or gray, 
Till the sun paint your fleecy skirts with gold, 
In honour to the world's great Author rise; 
Whether to deck with clouds the uncoloured sky, 
Or wet the thirsty earth with falling showers, 
Rising or falling still advance his praise. His praise, ye Winds, that from four quarters blow, 
Breathe soft or loud; and, wave your tops, ye Pines, 
With every plant, in sign of worship wave. Fountains, and ye that warble, as ye flow, 
Melodious murmurs, warbling tune his praise. Join voices, all ye living Souls:  Ye Birds, 
That singing up to Heaven-gate ascend, 
Bear on your wings and in your notes his praise. Ye that in waters glide, and ye that walk 
The earth, and stately tread, or lowly creep; 
Witness if I be silent, morn or even, 
To hill, or valley, fountain, or fresh shade, 
Made vocal by my song, and taught his praise. Hail, universal Lord, be bounteous still 
To give us only good; and if the night 
Have gathered aught of evil, or concealed, 
Disperse it, as now light dispels the dark! So prayed they innocent, and to their thoughts 
Firm peace recovered soon, and wonted calm. On to their morning's rural work they haste, 
Among sweet dews and flowers; where any row 
Of fruit-trees over-woody reached too far 
Their pampered boughs, and needed hands to check 
Fruitless embraces: or they led the vine 
To wed her elm; she, spoused, about him twines 
Her marriageable arms, and with him brings 
Her dower, the adopted clusters, to adorn 
His barren leaves. Them thus employed beheld 
With pity Heaven's high King, and to him called 
Raphael, the sociable Spirit, that deigned 
To travel with Tobias, and secured 
His marriage with the seventimes-wedded maid. Raphael, said he, thou hearest what stir on Earth 
Satan, from Hell 'scaped through the darksome gulf, 
Hath raised in Paradise; and how disturbed 
This night the human pair; how he designs 
In them at once to ruin all mankind. Go therefore, half this day as friend with friend 
Converse with Adam, in what bower or shade 
Thou findest him from the heat of noon retired, 
To respite his day-labour with repast, 
Or with repose; and such discourse bring on, 
As may advise him of his happy state, 
Happiness in his power left free to will, 
Left to his own free will, his will though free, 
Yet mutable; whence warn him to beware 
He swerve not, too secure:  Tell him withal 
His danger, and from whom; what enemy, 
Late fallen himself from Heaven, is plotting now 
The fall of others from like state of bliss; 
By violence? no, for that shall be withstood; 
But by deceit and lies:  This let him know, 
Lest, wilfully transgressing, he pretend 
Surprisal, unadmonished, unforewarned. So spake the Eternal Father, and fulfilled 
All justice:  Nor delayed the winged Saint 
After his charge received; but from among 
Thousand celestial Ardours, where he stood 
Veiled with his gorgeous wings, up springing light, 
Flew through the midst of Heaven; the angelick quires, 
On each hand parting, to his speed gave way 
Through all the empyreal road; till, at the gate 
Of Heaven arrived, the gate self-opened wide 
On golden hinges turning, as by work 
Divine the sovran Architect had framed. From hence no cloud, or, to obstruct his sight, 
Star interposed, however small he sees, 
Not unconformed to other shining globes, 
Earth, and the garden of God, with cedars crowned 
Above all hills. As when by night the glass 
Of Galileo, less assured, observes 
Imagined lands and regions in the moon: 
Or pilot, from amidst the Cyclades 
Delos or Samos first appearing, kens 
A cloudy spot. Down thither prone in flight 
He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky 
Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing 
Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan 
Winnows the buxom air; till, within soar 
Of towering eagles, to all the fowls he seems 
A phoenix, gazed by all as that sole bird, 
When, to enshrine his reliques in the Sun's 
Bright temple, to Egyptian Thebes he flies. At once on the eastern cliff of Paradise 
He lights, and to his proper shape returns 
A Seraph winged:  Six wings he wore, to shade 
His lineaments divine; the pair that clad 
Each shoulder broad, came mantling o'er his breast 
With regal ornament; the middle pair 
Girt like a starry zone his waist, and round 
Skirted his loins and thighs with downy gold 
And colours dipt in Heaven; the third his feet 
Shadowed from either heel with feathered mail, 
Sky-tinctured grain. Like Maia's son he stood, 
And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance filled 
The circuit wide. Straight knew him all the bands 
Of Angels under watch; and to his state, 
And to his message high, in honour rise; 
For on some message high they guessed him bound. Their glittering tents he passed, and now is come 
Into the blissful field, through groves of myrrh, 
And flowering odours, cassia, nard, and balm; 
A wilderness of sweets; for Nature here 
Wantoned as in her prime, and played at will 
Her virgin fancies pouring forth more sweet, 
Wild above rule or art, enormous bliss. Him through the spicy forest onward come 
Adam discerned, as in the door he sat 
Of his cool bower, while now the mounted sun 
Shot down direct his fervid rays to warm 
Earth's inmost womb, more warmth than Adam needs: 
And Eve within, due at her hour prepared 
For dinner savoury fruits, of taste to please 
True appetite, and not disrelish thirst 
Of nectarous draughts between, from milky stream, 
Berry or grape:  To whom thus Adam called. Haste hither, Eve, and worth thy sight behold 
Eastward among those trees, what glorious shape 
Comes this way moving; seems another morn 
Risen on mid-noon; some great behest from Heaven 
To us perhaps he brings, and will vouchsafe 
This day to be our guest. But go with speed, 
And, what thy stores contain, bring forth, and pour 
Abundance, fit to honour and receive 
Our heavenly stranger:  Well we may afford 
Our givers their own gifts, and large bestow 
From large bestowed, where Nature multiplies 
Her fertile growth, and by disburthening grows 
More fruitful, which instructs us not to spare. To whom thus Eve. Adam, earth's hallowed mould, 
Of God inspired! small store will serve, where store, 
All seasons, ripe for use hangs on the stalk; 
Save what by frugal storing firmness gains 
To nourish, and superfluous moist consumes: 
But I will haste, and from each bough and brake, 
Each plant and juciest gourd, will pluck such choice 
To entertain our Angel-guest, as he 
Beholding shall confess, that here on Earth 
God hath dispensed his bounties as in Heaven. So saying, with dispatchful looks in haste 
She turns, on hospitable thoughts intent 
What choice to choose for delicacy best, 
What order, so contrived as not to mix 
Tastes, not well joined, inelegant, but bring 
Taste after taste upheld with kindliest change; 
Bestirs her then, and from each tender stalk 
Whatever Earth, all-bearing mother, yields 
In India East or West, or middle shore 
In Pontus or the Punick coast, or where 
Alcinous reigned, fruit of all kinds, in coat 
Rough, or smooth rind, or bearded husk, or shell, 
She gathers, tribute large, and on the board 
Heaps with unsparing hand; for drink the grape 
She crushes, inoffensive must, and meaths 
From many a berry, and from sweet kernels pressed 
She tempers dulcet creams; nor these to hold 
Wants her fit vessels pure; then strows the ground 
With rose and odours from the shrub unfumed. Mean while our primitive great sire, to meet 
His God-like guest, walks forth, without more train 
Accompanied than with his own complete 
Perfections; in himself was all his state, 
More solemn than the tedious pomp that waits 
On princes, when their rich retinue long 
Of horses led, and grooms besmeared with gold, 
Dazzles the croud, and sets them all agape. Nearer his presence Adam, though not awed, 
Yet with submiss approach and reverence meek, 
As to a superiour nature bowing low, 
Thus said. Native of Heaven, for other place 
None can than Heaven such glorious shape contain; 
Since, by descending from the thrones above, 
Those happy places thou hast deigned a while 
To want, and honour these, vouchsafe with us 
Two only, who yet by sovran gift possess 
This spacious ground, in yonder shady bower 
To rest; and what the garden choicest bears 
To sit and taste, till this meridian heat 
Be over, and the sun more cool decline. Whom thus the angelick Virtue answered mild. Adam, I therefore came; nor art thou such 
Created, or such place hast here to dwell, 
As may not oft invite, though Spirits of Heaven, 
To visit thee; lead on then where thy bower 
O'ershades; for these mid-hours, till evening rise, 
I have at will. So to the sylvan lodge 
They came, that like Pomona's arbour smiled, 
With flowerets decked, and fragrant smells; but Eve, 
Undecked save with herself, more lovely fair 
Than Wood-Nymph, or the fairest Goddess feigned 
Of three that in mount Ida naked strove, 
Stood to entertain her guest from Heaven; no veil 
She needed, virtue-proof; no thought infirm 
Altered her cheek. On whom the Angel Hail 
Bestowed, the holy salutation used 
Long after to blest Mary, second Eve. Hail, Mother of Mankind, whose fruitful womb 
Shall fill the world more numerous with thy sons, 
Than with these various fruits the trees of God 
Have heaped this table!--Raised of grassy turf 
Their table was, and mossy seats had round, 
And on her ample square from side to side 
All autumn piled, though spring and autumn here 
Danced hand in hand. A while discourse they hold; 
No fear lest dinner cool; when thus began 
Our author. Heavenly stranger, please to taste 
These bounties, which our Nourisher, from whom 
All perfect good, unmeasured out, descends, 
To us for food and for delight hath caused 
The earth to yield; unsavoury food perhaps 
To spiritual natures; only this I know, 
That one celestial Father gives to all. To whom the Angel. Therefore what he gives 
(Whose praise be ever sung) to Man in part 
Spiritual, may of purest Spirits be found 
No ingrateful food:  And food alike those pure 
Intelligential substances require, 
As doth your rational; and both contain 
Within them every lower faculty 
Of sense, whereby they hear, see, smell, touch, taste, 
Tasting concoct, digest, assimilate, 
And corporeal to incorporeal turn. For know, whatever was created, needs 
To be sustained and fed:  Of elements 
The grosser feeds the purer, earth the sea, 
Earth and the sea feed air, the air those fires 
Ethereal, and as lowest first the moon; 
Whence in her visage round those spots, unpurged 
Vapours not yet into her substance turned. Nor doth the moon no nourishment exhale 
From her moist continent to higher orbs. The sun that light imparts to all, receives 
From all his alimental recompence 
In humid exhalations, and at even 
Sups with the ocean. Though in Heaven the trees 
Of life ambrosial fruitage bear, and vines 
Yield nectar; though from off the boughs each morn 
We brush mellifluous dews, and find the ground 
Covered with pearly grain:  Yet God hath here 
Varied his bounty so with new delights, 
As may compare with Heaven; and to taste 
Think not I shall be nice. So down they sat, 
And to their viands fell; nor seemingly 
The Angel, nor in mist, the common gloss 
Of Theologians; but with keen dispatch 
Of real hunger, and concoctive heat 
To transubstantiate:  What redounds, transpires 
Through Spirits with ease; nor wonder;if by fire 
Of sooty coal the empirick alchemist 
Can turn, or holds it possible to turn, 
Metals of drossiest ore to perfect gold, 
As from the mine. Mean while at table Eve 
Ministered naked, and their flowing cups 
With pleasant liquours crowned:  O innocence 
Deserving Paradise! if ever, then, 
Then had the sons of God excuse to have been 
Enamoured at that sight; but in those hearts 
Love unlibidinous reigned, nor jealousy 
Was understood, the injured lover's hell. Thus when with meats and drinks they had sufficed, 
Not burdened nature, sudden mind arose 
In Adam, not to let the occasion pass 
Given him by this great conference to know 
Of things above his world, and of their being 
Who dwell in Heaven, whose excellence he saw 
Transcend his own so far; whose radiant forms, 
Divine effulgence, whose high power, so far 
Exceeded human; and his wary speech 
Thus to the empyreal minister he framed. Inhabitant with God, now know I well 
Thy favour, in this honour done to Man; 
Under whose lowly roof thou hast vouchsafed 
To enter, and these earthly fruits to taste, 
Food not of Angels, yet accepted so, 
As that more willingly thou couldst not seem 
At Heaven's high feasts to have fed: yet what compare 
To whom the winged Hierarch replied. O Adam, One Almighty is, from whom 
All things proceed, and up to him return, 
If not depraved from good, created all 
Such to perfection, one first matter all, 
Endued with various forms, various degrees 
Of substance, and, in things that live, of life; 
But more refined, more spiritous, and pure, 
As nearer to him placed, or nearer tending 
Each in their several active spheres assigned, 
Till body up to spirit work, in bounds 
Proportioned to each kind. So from the root 
Springs lighter the green stalk, from thence the leaves 
More aery, last the bright consummate flower 
Spirits odorous breathes: flowers and their fruit, 
Man's nourishment, by gradual scale sublimed, 
To vital spirits aspire, to animal, 
To intellectual; give both life and sense, 
Fancy and understanding; whence the soul 
Reason receives, and reason is her being, 
Discursive, or intuitive; discourse 
Is oftest yours, the latter most is ours, 
Differing but in degree, of kind the same. Wonder not then, what God for you saw good 
If I refuse not, but convert, as you 
To proper substance. Time may come, when Men 
With Angels may participate, and find 
No inconvenient diet, nor too light fare; 
And from these corporal nutriments perhaps 
Your bodies may at last turn all to spirit, 
Improved by tract of time, and, winged, ascend 
Ethereal, as we; or may, at choice, 
Here or in heavenly Paradises dwell; 
If ye be found obedient, and retain 
Unalterably firm his love entire, 
Whose progeny you are. Mean while enjoy 
Your fill what happiness this happy state 
Can comprehend, incapable of more. To whom the patriarch of mankind replied. O favourable Spirit, propitious guest, 
Well hast thou taught the way that might direct 
Our knowledge, and the scale of nature set 
From center to circumference; whereon, 
In contemplation of created things, 
By steps we may ascend to God. But say, 
What meant that caution joined, If ye be found 
Obedient? Can we want obedience then 
To him, or possibly his love desert, 
Who formed us from the dust and placed us here 
Full to the utmost measure of what bliss 
Human desires can seek or apprehend? To whom the Angel. Son of Heaven and Earth, 
Attend! That thou art happy, owe to God; 
That thou continuest such, owe to thyself, 
That is, to thy obedience; therein stand. This was that caution given thee; be advised. God made thee perfect, not immutable; 
And good he made thee, but to persevere 
He left it in thy power; ordained thy will 
By nature free, not over-ruled by fate 
Inextricable, or strict necessity: 
Our voluntary service he requires, 
Not our necessitated; such with him 
Finds no acceptance, nor can find; for how 
Can hearts, not free, be tried whether they serve 
Willing or no, who will but what they must 
By destiny, and can no other choose? Myself, and all the angelick host, that stand 
In sight of God, enthroned, our happy state 
Hold, as you yours, while our obedience holds; 
On other surety none:  Freely we serve, 
Because we freely love, as in our will 
To love or not; in this we stand or fall: 
And some are fallen, to disobedience fallen, 
And so from Heaven to deepest Hell; O fall 
From what high state of bliss, into what woe! To whom our great progenitor. Thy words 
Attentive, and with more delighted ear, 
Divine instructer, I have heard, than when 
Cherubick songs by night from neighbouring hills 
Aereal musick send:  Nor knew I not 
To be both will and deed created free; 
Yet that we never shall forget to love 
Our Maker, and obey him whose command 
Single is yet so just, my constant thoughts 
Assured me, and still assure:  Though what thou tellest 
Hath passed in Heaven, some doubt within me move, 
But more desire to hear, if thou consent, 
The full relation, which must needs be strange, 
Worthy of sacred silence to be heard; 
And we have yet large day, for scarce the sun 
Hath finished half his journey, and scarce begins 
His other half in the great zone of Heaven. Thus Adam made request; and Raphael, 
After short pause assenting, thus began. High matter thou enjoinest me, O prime of men, 
Sad task and hard:  For how shall I relate 
To human sense the invisible exploits 
Of warring Spirits? how, without remorse, 
The ruin of so many glorious once 
And perfect while they stood? how last unfold 
The secrets of another world, perhaps 
Not lawful to reveal? yet for thy good 
This is dispensed; and what surmounts the reach 
Of human sense, I shall delineate so, 
By likening spiritual to corporal forms, 
As may express them best; though what if Earth 
Be but a shadow of Heaven, and things therein 
Each to other like, more than on earth is thought? As yet this world was not, and Chaos wild 
Reigned where these Heavens now roll, where Earth now rests 
Upon her center poised; when on a day 
(For time, though in eternity, applied 
To motion, measures all things durable 
By present, past, and future,) on such day 
As Heaven's great year brings forth, the empyreal host 
Of Angels by imperial summons called, 
Innumerable before the Almighty's throne 
Forthwith, from all the ends of Heaven, appeared 
Under their Hierarchs in orders bright: 
Ten thousand thousand ensigns high advanced, 
Standards and gonfalons 'twixt van and rear 
Stream in the air, and for distinction serve 
Of hierarchies, of orders, and degrees; 
Or in their glittering tissues bear imblazed 
Holy memorials, acts of zeal and love 
Recorded eminent. Thus when in orbs 
Of circuit inexpressible they stood, 
Orb within orb, the Father Infinite, 
By whom in bliss imbosomed sat the Son, 
Amidst as from a flaming mount, whose top 
Brightness had made invisible, thus spake. Hear, all ye Angels, progeny of light, 
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers; 
Hear my decree, which unrevoked shall stand. This day I have begot whom I declare 
My only Son, and on this holy hill 
Him have anointed, whom ye now behold 
At my right hand; your head I him appoint; 
And by myself have sworn, to him shall bow 
All knees in Heaven, and shall confess him Lord: 
Under his great vice-gerent reign abide 
United, as one individual soul, 
For ever happy:  Him who disobeys, 
Me disobeys, breaks union, and that day, 
Cast out from God and blessed vision, falls 
Into utter darkness, deep ingulfed, his place 
Ordained without redemption, without end. So spake the Omnipotent, and with his words 
All seemed well pleased; all seemed, but were not all. That day, as other solemn days, they spent 
In song and dance about the sacred hill; 
Mystical dance, which yonder starry sphere 
Of planets, and of fixed, in all her wheels 
Resembles nearest, mazes intricate, 
Eccentrick, intervolved, yet regular 
Then most, when most irregular they seem; 
And in their motions harmony divine 
So smooths her charming tones, that God's own ear 
Listens delighted. Evening now approached, 
(For we have also our evening and our morn, 
We ours for change delectable, not need;) 
Forthwith from dance to sweet repast they turn 
Desirous; all in circles as they stood, 
Tables are set, and on a sudden piled 
With Angels food, and rubied nectar flows 
In pearl, in diamond, and massy gold, 
Fruit of delicious vines, the growth of Heaven. On flowers reposed, and with fresh flowerets crowned, 
They eat, they drink, and in communion sweet 
Quaff immortality and joy, secure 
Of surfeit, where full measure only bounds 
Excess, before the all-bounteous King, who showered 
With copious hand, rejoicing in their joy. Now when ambrosial night with clouds exhaled 
From that high mount of God, whence light and shade 
Spring both, the face of brightest Heaven had changed 
To grateful twilight, (for night comes not there 
In darker veil,) and roseat dews disposed 
All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest; 
Wide over all the plain, and wider far 
Than all this globous earth in plain outspread, 
(Such are the courts of God) the angelick throng, 
Dispersed in bands and files, their camp extend 
By living streams among the trees of life, 
Pavilions numberless, and sudden reared, 
Celestial tabernacles, where they slept 
Fanned with cool winds; save those, who, in their course, 
Melodious hymns about the sovran throne 
Alternate all night long: but not so waked 
Satan; so call him now, his former name 
Is heard no more in Heaven; he of the first, 
If not the first Arch-Angel, great in power, 
In favour and pre-eminence, yet fraught 
With envy against the Son of God, that day 
Honoured by his great Father, and proclaimed 
Messiah King anointed, could not bear 
Through pride that sight, and thought himself impaired. Deep malice thence conceiving and disdain, 
Soon as midnight brought on the dusky hour 
Friendliest to sleep and silence, he resolved 
With all his legions to dislodge, and leave 
Unworshipt, unobeyed, the throne supreme, 
Contemptuous; and his next subordinate 
Awakening, thus to him in secret spake. Sleepest thou, Companion dear? What sleep can close 
Thy eye-lids? and rememberest what decree 
Of yesterday, so late hath passed the lips 
Of Heaven's Almighty. Thou to me thy thoughts 
Wast wont, I mine to thee was wont to impart; 
Both waking we were one; how then can now 
Thy sleep dissent? New laws thou seest imposed; 
New laws from him who reigns, new minds may raise 
In us who serve, new counsels to debate 
What doubtful may ensue:  More in this place 
To utter is not safe. Assemble thou 
Of all those myriads which we lead the chief; 
Tell them, that by command, ere yet dim night 
Her shadowy cloud withdraws, I am to haste, 
And all who under me their banners wave, 
Homeward, with flying march, where we possess 
The quarters of the north; there to prepare 
Fit entertainment to receive our King, 
The great Messiah, and his new commands, 
Who speedily through all the hierarchies 
Intends to pass triumphant, and give laws. So spake the false Arch-Angel, and infused 
Bad influence into the unwary breast 
Of his associate:  He together calls, 
Or several one by one, the regent Powers, 
Under him Regent; tells, as he was taught, 
That the Most High commanding, now ere night, 
Now ere dim night had disincumbered Heaven, 
The great hierarchal standard was to move; 
Tells the suggested cause, and casts between 
Ambiguous words and jealousies, to sound 
Or taint integrity:  But all obeyed 
The wonted signal, and superiour voice 
Of their great Potentate; for great indeed 
His name, and high was his degree in Heaven; 
His countenance, as the morning-star that guides 
The starry flock, allured them, and with lies 
Drew after him the third part of Heaven's host. Mean while the Eternal eye, whose sight discerns 
Abstrusest thoughts, from forth his holy mount, 
And from within the golden lamps that burn 
Nightly before him, saw without their light 
Rebellion rising; saw in whom, how spread 
Among the sons of morn, what multitudes 
Were banded to oppose his high decree; 
And, smiling, to his only Son thus said. Son, thou in whom my glory I behold 
In full resplendence, Heir of all my might, 
Nearly it now concerns us to be sure 
Of our Omnipotence, and with what arms 
We mean to hold what anciently we claim 
Of deity or empire:  Such a foe 
Is rising, who intends to erect his throne 
Equal to ours, throughout the spacious north; 
Nor so content, hath in his thought to try 
In battle, what our power is, or our right. Let us advise, and to this hazard draw 
With speed what force is left, and all employ 
In our defence; lest unawares we lose 
This our high place, our sanctuary, our hill. To whom the Son with calm aspect and clear, 
Lightning divine, ineffable, serene, 
Made answer. Mighty Father, thou thy foes 
Justly hast in derision, and, secure, 
Laughest at their vain designs and tumults vain, 
Matter to me of glory, whom their hate 
Illustrates, when they see all regal power 
Given me to quell their pride, and in event 
Know whether I be dextrous to subdue 
Thy rebels, or be found the worst in Heaven. So spake the Son; but Satan, with his Powers, 
Far was advanced on winged speed; an host 
Innumerable as the stars of night, 
Or stars of morning, dew-drops, which the sun 
Impearls on every leaf and every flower. Regions they passed, the mighty regencies 
Of Seraphim, and Potentates, and Thrones, 
In their triple degrees; regions to which 
All thy dominion, Adam, is no more 
Than what this garden is to all the earth, 
And all the sea, from one entire globose 
Stretched into longitude; which having passed, 
At length into the limits of the north 
They came; and Satan to his royal seat 
High on a hill, far blazing, as a mount 
Raised on a mount, with pyramids and towers 
From diamond quarries hewn, and rocks of gold; 
The palace of great Lucifer, (so call 
That structure in the dialect of men 
Interpreted,) which not long after, he 
Affecting all equality with God, 
In imitation of that mount whereon 
Messiah was declared in sight of Heaven, 
The Mountain of the Congregation called; 
For thither he assembled all his train, 
Pretending so commanded to consult 
About the great reception of their King, 
Thither to come, and with calumnious art 
Of counterfeited truth thus held their ears. Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers; 
If these magnifick titles yet remain 
Not merely titular, since by decree 
Another now hath to himself engrossed 
All power, and us eclipsed under the name 
Of King anointed, for whom all this haste 
Of midnight-march, and hurried meeting here, 
This only to consult how we may best, 
With what may be devised of honours new, 
Receive him coming to receive from us 
Knee-tribute yet unpaid, prostration vile! Too much to one! but double how endured, 
To one, and to his image now proclaimed? But what if better counsels might erect 
Our minds, and teach us to cast off this yoke? Will ye submit your necks, and choose to bend 
The supple knee? Ye will not, if I trust 
To know ye right, or if ye know yourselves 
Natives and sons of Heaven possessed before 
By none; and if not equal all, yet free, 
Equally free; for orders and degrees 
Jar not with liberty, but well consist. Who can in reason then, or right, assume 
Monarchy over such as live by right 
His equals, if in power and splendour less, 
In freedom equal? or can introduce 
Law and edict on us, who without law 
Err not? much less for this to be our Lord, 
And look for adoration, to the abuse 
Of those imperial titles, which assert 
Our being ordained to govern, not to serve. Thus far his bold discourse without controul 
Had audience; when among the Seraphim 
Abdiel, than whom none with more zeal adored 
The Deity, and divine commands obeyed, 
Stood up, and in a flame of zeal severe 
The current of his fury thus opposed. O argument blasphemous, false, and proud! Words which no ear ever to hear in Heaven 
Expected, least of all from thee,  Ingrate, 
In place thyself so high above thy peers. Canst thou with impious obloquy condemn 
The just decree of God, pronounced and sworn, 
That to his only Son, by right endued 
With regal scepter, every soul in Heaven 
Shall bend the knee, and in that honour due 
Confess him rightful King? unjust, thou sayest, 
Flatly unjust, to bind with laws the free, 
And equal over equals to let reign, 
One over all with unsucceeded power. Shalt thou give law to God? shalt thou dispute 
With him the points of liberty, who made 
Thee what thou art, and formed the Powers of Heaven 
Such as he pleased, and circumscribed their being? Yet, by experience taught, we know how good, 
And of our good and of our dignity 
How provident he is; how far from thought 
To make us less, bent rather to exalt 
Our happy state, under one head more near 
United. But to grant it thee unjust, 
That equal over equals monarch reign: 
Thyself, though great and glorious, dost thou count, 
Or all angelick nature joined in one, 
Equal to him begotten Son? by whom, 
As by his Word, the Mighty Father made 
All things, even thee; and all the Spirits of Heaven 
By him created in their bright degrees, 
Crowned them with glory, and to their glory named 
Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers, 
Essential Powers; nor by his reign obscured, 
But more illustrious made; since he the head 
One of our number thus reduced becomes; 
His laws our laws; all honour to him done 
Returns our own. Cease then this impious rage, 
And tempt not these; but hasten to appease 
The incensed Father, and the incensed Son, 
While pardon may be found in time besought. So spake the fervent Angel; but his zeal 
None seconded, as out of season judged, 
Or singular and rash:  Whereat rejoiced 
The Apostate, and, more haughty, thus replied. That we were formed then sayest thou? and the work 
Of secondary hands, by task transferred 
From Father to his Son? strange point and new! Doctrine which we would know whence learned: who saw 
When this creation was? rememberest thou 
Thy making, while the Maker gave thee being? We know no time when we were not as now; 
Know none before us, self-begot, self-raised 
By our own quickening power, when fatal course 
Had circled his full orb, the birth mature 
Of this our native Heaven, ethereal sons. Our puissance is our own; our own right hand 
Shall teach us highest deeds, by proof to try 
Who is our equal:  Then thou shalt behold 
Whether by supplication we intend 
Address, and to begirt the almighty throne 
Beseeching or besieging. This report, 
These tidings carry to the anointed King; 
And fly, ere evil intercept thy flight. He said; and, as the sound of waters deep, 
Hoarse murmur echoed to his words applause 
Through the infinite host; nor less for that 
The flaming Seraph fearless, though alone 
Encompassed round with foes, thus answered bold. O alienate from God, O Spirit accursed, 
Forsaken of all good! I see thy fall 
Determined, and thy hapless crew involved 
In this perfidious fraud, contagion spread 
Both of thy crime and punishment:  Henceforth 
No more be troubled how to quit the yoke 
Of God's Messiah; those indulgent laws 
Will not be now vouchsafed; other decrees 
Against thee are gone forth without recall; 
That golden scepter, which thou didst reject, 
Is now an iron rod to bruise and break 
Thy disobedience. Well thou didst advise; 
Yet not for thy advice or threats I fly 
These wicked tents devoted, lest the wrath 
Impendent, raging into sudden flame, 
Distinguish not:  For soon expect to feel 
His thunder on thy head, devouring fire. Then who created thee lamenting learn, 
When who can uncreate thee thou shalt know. So spake the Seraph Abdiel, faithful found 
Among the faithless, faithful only he; 
Among innumerable false, unmoved, 
Unshaken, unseduced, unterrified, 
His loyalty he kept, his love, his zeal; 
Nor number, nor example, with him wrought 
To swerve from truth, or change his constant mind, 
Though single. From amidst them forth he passed, 
Long way through hostile scorn, which he sustained 
Superiour, nor of violence feared aught; 
And, with retorted scorn, his back he turned 
On those proud towers to swift destruction doomed. Book VI                                                          
 
 
All night the dreadless Angel, unpursued, 
Through Heaven's wide champain held his way; till Morn, 
Waked by the circling Hours, with rosy hand 
Unbarred the gates of light. There is a cave 
Within the mount of God, fast by his throne, 
Where light and darkness in perpetual round 
Lodge and dislodge by turns, which makes through Heaven 
Grateful vicissitude, like day and night; 
Light issues forth, and at the other door 
Obsequious darkness enters, till her hour 
To veil the Heaven, though darkness there might well 
Seem twilight here:  And now went forth the Morn 
Such as in highest Heaven arrayed in gold 
Empyreal; from before her vanished Night, 
Shot through with orient beams; when all the plain 
Covered with thick embattled squadrons bright, 
Chariots, and flaming arms, and fiery steeds, 
Reflecting blaze on blaze, first met his view: 
War he perceived, war in procinct; and found 
Already known what he for news had thought 
To have reported:  Gladly then he mixed 
Among those friendly Powers, who him received 
With joy and acclamations loud, that one, 
That of so many myriads fallen, yet one 
Returned not lost. On to the sacred hill 
They led him high applauded, and present 
Before the seat supreme; from whence a voice, 
From midst a golden cloud, thus mild was heard. Servant of God. Well done; well hast thou fought 
The better fight, who single hast maintained 
Against revolted multitudes the cause 
Of truth, in word mightier than they in arms; 
And for the testimony of truth hast borne 
Universal reproach, far worse to bear 
Than violence; for this was all thy care 
To stand approved in sight of God, though worlds 
Judged thee perverse:  The easier conquest now 
Remains thee, aided by this host of friends, 
Back on thy foes more glorious to return, 
Than scorned thou didst depart; and to subdue 
By force, who reason for their law refuse, 
Right reason for their law, and for their King 
Messiah, who by right of merit reigns. Go, Michael, of celestial armies prince, 
And thou, in military prowess next, 
Gabriel, lead forth to battle these my sons 
Invincible; lead forth my armed Saints, 
By thousands and by millions, ranged for fight, 
Equal in number to that Godless crew 
Rebellious:  Them with fire and hostile arms 
Fearless assault; and, to the brow of Heaven 
Pursuing, drive them out from God and bliss, 
Into their place of punishment, the gulf 
Of Tartarus, which ready opens wide 
His fiery Chaos to receive their fall. So spake the Sovran Voice, and clouds began 
To darken all the hill, and smoke to roll 
In dusky wreaths, reluctant flames, the sign 
Of wrath awaked; nor with less dread the loud 
Ethereal trumpet from on high 'gan blow: 
At which command the Powers militant, 
That stood for Heaven, in mighty quadrate joined 
Of union irresistible, moved on 
In silence their bright legions, to the sound 
Of instrumental harmony, that breathed 
Heroick ardour to adventurous deeds 
Under their God-like leaders, in the cause 
Of God and his Messiah. On they move 
Indissolubly firm; nor obvious hill, 
Nor straitening vale, nor wood, nor stream, divides 
Their perfect ranks; for high above the ground 
Their march was, and the passive air upbore 
Their nimble tread; as when the total kind 
Of birds, in orderly array on wing, 
Came summoned over Eden to receive 
Their names of thee; so over many a tract 
Of Heaven they marched, and many a province wide, 
Tenfold the length of this terrene:  At last, 
Far in the horizon to the north appeared 
From skirt to skirt a fiery region, stretched 
In battailous aspect, and nearer view 
Bristled with upright beams innumerable 
Of rigid spears, and helmets thronged, and shields 
Various, with boastful argument portrayed, 
The banded Powers of Satan hasting on 
With furious expedition; for they weened 
That self-same day, by fight or by surprise, 
To win the mount of God, and on his throne 
To set the Envier of his state, the proud 
Aspirer; but their thoughts proved fond and vain 
In the mid way:  Though strange to us it seemed 
At first, that Angel should with Angel war, 
And in fierce hosting meet, who wont to meet 
So oft in festivals of joy and love 
Unanimous, as sons of one great Sire, 
Hymning the Eternal Father:  But the shout 
Of battle now began, and rushing sound 
Of onset ended soon each milder thought. High in the midst, exalted as a God, 
The Apostate in his sun-bright chariot sat, 
Idol of majesty divine, enclosed 
With flaming Cherubim, and golden shields; 
Then lighted from his gorgeous throne, for now 
"twixt host and host but narrow space was left, 
A dreadful interval, and front to front 
Presented stood in terrible array 
Of hideous length:  Before the cloudy van, 
On the rough edge of battle ere it joined, 
Satan, with vast and haughty strides advanced, 
Came towering, armed in adamant and gold; 
Abdiel that sight endured not, where he stood 
Among the mightiest, bent on highest deeds, 
And thus his own undaunted heart explores. O Heaven! that such resemblance of the Highest 
Should yet remain, where faith and realty 
Remain not:  Wherefore should not strength and might 
There fail where virtue fails, or weakest prove 
Where boldest, though to fight unconquerable? His puissance, trusting in the Almighty's aid, 
I mean to try, whose reason I have tried 
Unsound and false; nor is it aught but just, 
That he, who in debate of truth hath won, 
Should win in arms, in both disputes alike 
Victor; though brutish that contest and foul, 
When reason hath to deal with force, yet so 
Most reason is that reason overcome. So pondering, and from his armed peers 
Forth stepping opposite, half-way he met 
His daring foe, at this prevention more 
Incensed, and thus securely him defied. Proud, art thou met? thy hope was to have reached 
The highth of thy aspiring unopposed, 
The throne of God unguarded, and his side 
Abandoned, at the terrour of thy power 
Or potent tongue:  Fool!not to think how vain 
Against the Omnipotent to rise in arms; 
Who out of smallest things could, without end, 
Have raised incessant armies to defeat 
Thy folly; or with solitary hand 
Reaching beyond all limit, at one blow, 
Unaided, could have finished thee, and whelmed 
Thy legions under darkness:  But thou seest 
All are not of thy train; there be, who faith 
Prefer, and piety to God, though then 
To thee not visible, when I alone 
Seemed in thy world erroneous to dissent 
From all:  My sect thou seest;now learn too late 
How few sometimes may know, when thousands err. Whom the grand foe, with scornful eye askance, 
Thus answered. Ill for thee, but in wished hour 
Of my revenge, first sought for, thou returnest 
From flight, seditious Angel! to receive 
Thy merited reward, the first assay 
Of this right hand provoked, since first that tongue, 
Inspired with contradiction, durst oppose 
A third part of the Gods, in synod met 
Their deities to assert; who, while they feel 
Vigour divine within them, can allow 
Omnipotence to none. But well thou comest 
Before thy fellows, ambitious to win 
From me some plume, that thy success may show 
Destruction to the rest:  This pause between, 
(Unanswered lest thou boast) to let thee know, 
At first I thought that Liberty and Heaven 
To heavenly souls had been all one; but now 
I see that most through sloth had rather serve, 
Ministring Spirits, trained up in feast and song! Such hast thou armed, the minstrelsy of Heaven, 
Servility with freedom to contend, 
As both their deeds compared this day shall prove. To whom in brief thus Abdiel stern replied. Apostate! still thou errest, nor end wilt find 
Of erring, from the path of truth remote: 
Unjustly thou depravest it with the name 
Of servitude, to serve whom God ordains, 
Or Nature:  God and Nature bid the same, 
When he who rules is worthiest, and excels 
Them whom he governs. This is servitude, 
To serve the unwise, or him who hath rebelled 
Against his worthier, as thine now serve thee, 
Thyself not free, but to thyself enthralled; 
Yet lewdly darest our ministring upbraid. Reign thou in Hell, thy kingdom; let me serve 
In Heaven God ever blest, and his divine 
Behests obey, worthiest to be obeyed; 
Yet chains in Hell, not realms, expect:  Mean while 
From me returned, as erst thou saidst, from flight, 
This greeting on thy impious crest receive. So saying, a noble stroke he lifted high, 
Which hung not, but so swift with tempest fell 
On the proud crest of Satan, that no sight, 
Nor motion of swift thought, less could his shield, 
Such ruin intercept:  Ten paces huge 
He back recoiled; the tenth on bended knee 
His massy spear upstaid; as if on earth 
Winds under ground, or waters forcing way, 
Sidelong had pushed a mountain from his seat, 
Half sunk with all his pines. Amazement seised 
The rebel Thrones, but greater rage, to see 
Thus foiled their mightiest; ours joy filled, and shout, 
Presage of victory, and fierce desire 
Of battle:  Whereat Michael bid sound 
The Arch-Angel trumpet; through the vast of Heaven 
It sounded, and the faithful armies rung 
Hosanna to the Highest:  Nor stood at gaze 
The adverse legions, nor less hideous joined 
The horrid shock. Now storming fury rose, 
And clamour such as heard in Heaven till now 
Was never; arms on armour clashing brayed 
Horrible discord, and the madding wheels 
Of brazen chariots raged; dire was the noise 
Of conflict; over head the dismal hiss 
Of fiery darts in flaming vollies flew, 
And flying vaulted either host with fire. So under fiery cope together rushed 
Both battles main, with ruinous assault 
And inextinguishable rage. All Heaven 
Resounded; and had Earth been then, all Earth 
Had to her center shook. What wonder? when 
Millions of fierce encountering Angels fought 
On either side, the least of whom could wield 
These elements, and arm him with the force 
Of all their regions:  How much more of power 
Army against army numberless to raise 
Dreadful combustion warring, and disturb, 
Though not destroy, their happy native seat; 
Had not the Eternal King Omnipotent, 
From his strong hold of Heaven, high over-ruled 
And limited their might; though numbered such 
As each divided legion might have seemed 
A numerous host; in strength each armed hand 
A legion; led in fight, yet leader seemed 
Each warriour single as in chief, expert 
When to advance, or stand, or turn the sway 
Of battle, open when, and when to close 
The ridges of grim war:  No thought of flight, 
None of retreat, no unbecoming deed 
That argued fear; each on himself relied, 
As only in his arm the moment lay 
Of victory:  Deeds of eternal fame 
Were done, but infinite; for wide was spread 
That war and various; sometimes on firm ground 
A standing fight, then, soaring on main wing, 
Tormented all the air; all air seemed then 
Conflicting fire. Long time in even scale 
The battle hung; till Satan, who that day 
Prodigious power had shown, and met in arms 
No equal, ranging through the dire attack 
Of fighting Seraphim confused, at length 
Saw where the sword of Michael smote, and felled 
Squadrons at once; with huge two-handed sway 
Brandished aloft, the horrid edge came down 
Wide-wasting; such destruction to withstand 
He hasted, and opposed the rocky orb 
Of tenfold adamant, his ample shield, 
A vast circumference. At his approach 
The great Arch-Angel from his warlike toil 
Surceased, and glad, as hoping here to end 
Intestine war in Heaven, the arch-foe subdued 
Or captive dragged in chains, with hostile frown 
And visage all inflamed first thus began. Author of evil, unknown till thy revolt, 
Unnamed in Heaven, now plenteous as thou seest 
These acts of hateful strife, hateful to all, 
Though heaviest by just measure on thyself, 
And thy  adherents:  How hast thou disturbed 
Heaven's blessed peace, and into nature brought 
Misery, uncreated till the crime 
Of thy rebellion! how hast thou instilled 
Thy malice into thousands, once upright 
And faithful, now proved false! But think not here 
To trouble holy rest; Heaven casts thee out 
From all her confines. Heaven, the seat of bliss, 
Brooks not the works of violence and war. Hence then, and evil go with thee along, 
Thy offspring, to the place of evil, Hell; 
Thou and thy wicked crew! there mingle broils, 
Ere this avenging sword begin thy doom, 
Or some more sudden vengeance, winged from God, 
Precipitate thee with augmented pain. So spake the Prince of Angels; to whom thus 
The Adversary. Nor think thou with wind 
Of aery threats to awe whom yet with deeds 
Thou canst not. Hast thou turned the least of these 
To flight, or if to fall, but that they rise 
Unvanquished, easier to transact with me 
That thou shouldst hope, imperious, and with threats 
To chase me hence? err not, that so shall end 
The strife which thou callest evil, but we style 
The strife of glory; which we mean to win, 
Or turn this Heaven itself into the Hell 
Thou fablest; here however to dwell free, 
If not to reign:  Mean while thy utmost force, 
And join him named Almighty to thy aid, 
I fly not, but have sought thee far and nigh. They ended parle, and both addressed for fight 
Unspeakable; for who, though with the tongue 
Of Angels, can relate, or to what things 
Liken on earth conspicuous, that may lift 
Human imagination to such highth 
Of Godlike power? for likest Gods they seemed, 
Stood they or moved, in stature, motion, arms, 
Fit to decide the empire of great Heaven. Now waved their fiery swords, and in the air 
Made horrid circles; two broad suns their shields 
Blazed opposite, while Expectation stood 
In horrour:  From each hand with speed retired, 
Where erst was thickest fight, the angelick throng, 
And left large field, unsafe within the wind 
Of such commotion; such as, to set forth 
Great things by small, if, nature's concord broke, 
Among the constellations war were sprung, 
Two planets, rushing from aspect malign 
Of fiercest opposition, in mid sky 
Should combat, and their jarring spheres confound. Together both with next to almighty arm 
Up-lifted imminent, one stroke they aimed 
That might determine, and not need repeat, 
As not of power at once; nor odds appeared 
In might or swift prevention:  But the sword 
Of Michael from the armoury of God 
Was given him tempered so, that neither keen 
Nor solid might resist that edge: it met 
The sword of Satan, with steep force to smite 
Descending, and in half cut sheer; nor staid, 
But with swift wheel reverse, deep entering, shared 
All his right side:  Then Satan first knew pain, 
And writhed him to and fro convolved; so sore 
The griding sword with discontinuous wound 
Passed through him:  But the ethereal substance closed, 
Not long divisible; and from the gash 
A stream of necturous humour issuing flowed 
Sanguine, such as celestial Spirits may bleed, 
And all his armour stained, ere while so bright. Forthwith on all sides to his aid was run 
By Angels many and strong, who interposed 
Defence, while others bore him on their shields 
Back to his chariot, where it stood retired 
From off the files of war:  There they him laid 
Gnashing for anguish, and despite, and shame, 
To find himself not matchless, and his pride 
Humbled by such rebuke, so far beneath 
His confidence to equal God in power. Yet soon he healed; for Spirits that live throughout 
Vital in every part, not as frail man 
In entrails, heart of head, liver or reins, 
Cannot but by annihilating die; 
Nor in their liquid texture mortal wound 
Receive, no more than can the fluid air: 
All heart they live, all head, all eye, all ear, 
All intellect, all sense; and, as they please, 
They limb themselves, and colour, shape, or size 
Assume, as?kikes them best, condense or rare. Mean while in other parts like deeds deserved 
Memorial, where the might of Gabriel fought, 
And with fierce ensigns pierced the deep array 
Of Moloch, furious king; who him defied, 
And at his chariot-wheels to drag him bound 
Threatened, nor from the Holy One of Heaven 
Refrained his tongue blasphemous; but anon 
Down cloven to the waist, with shattered arms 
And uncouth pain fled bellowing. On each wing 
Uriel, and Raphael, his vaunting foe, 
Though huge, and in a rock of diamond armed, 
Vanquished Adramelech, and Asmadai, 
Two potent Thrones, that to be less than Gods 
Disdained, but meaner thoughts learned in their flight, 
Mangled with ghastly wounds through plate and mail. Nor stood unmindful Abdiel to annoy 
The atheist crew, but with redoubled blow 
Ariel, and Arioch, and the violence 
Of Ramiel scorched and blasted, overthrew. I might relate of thousands, and their names 
Eternize here on earth; but those elect 
Angels, contented with their fame in Heaven, 
Seek not the praise of men:  The other sort, 
In might though wonderous and in acts of war, 
Nor of renown less eager, yet by doom 
Cancelled from Heaven and sacred memory, 
Nameless in dark oblivion let them dwell. For strength from truth divided, and from just, 
Illaudable, nought merits but dispraise 
And ignominy; yet to glory aspires 
Vain-glorious, and through infamy seeks fame: 
Therefore eternal silence be their doom. And now, their mightiest quelled, the battle swerved, 
With many an inroad gored; deformed rout 
Entered, and foul disorder; all the ground 
With shivered armour strown, and on a heap 
Chariot and charioteer lay overturned, 
And fiery-foaming steeds; what stood, recoiled 
O'er-wearied, through the faint Satanick host 
Defensive scarce, or with pale fear surprised, 
Then first with fear surprised, and sense of pain, 
Fled ignominious, to such evil brought 
By sin of disobedience; till that hour 
Not liable to fear, or flight, or pain. Far otherwise the inviolable Saints, 
In cubick phalanx firm, advanced entire, 
Invulnerable, impenetrably armed; 
Such high advantages their innocence 
Gave them above their foes; not to have sinned, 
Not to have disobeyed; in fight they stood 
Unwearied, unobnoxious to be pained 
By wound, though from their place by violence moved, 
Now Night her course began, and, over Heaven 
Inducing darkness, grateful truce imposed, 
And silence on the odious din of war: 
Under her cloudy covert both retired, 
Victor and vanquished:  On the foughten field 
Michael and his Angels prevalent 
Encamping, placed in guard their watches round, 
Cherubick waving fires:  On the other part, 
Satan with his rebellious disappeared, 
Far in the dark dislodged; and, void of rest, 
His potentates to council called by night; 
And in the midst thus undismayed began. O now in danger tried, now known in arms 
Not to be overpowered, Companions dear, 
Found worthy not of liberty alone, 
Too mean pretence! but what we more affect, 
Honour, dominion, glory, and renown; 
Who have sustained one day in doubtful fight, 
(And if one day, why not eternal days?) What Heaven's Lord had powerfullest to send 
Against us from about his throne, and judged 
Sufficient to subdue us to his will, 
But proves not so:  Then fallible, it seems, 
Of future we may deem him, though till now 
Omniscient thought. True is, less firmly armed, 
Some disadvantage we endured and pain, 
Till now not known, but, known, as soon contemned; 
Since now we find this our empyreal form 
Incapable of mortal injury, 
Imperishable, and, though pierced with wound, 
Soon closing, and by native vigour healed. Of evil then so small as easy think 
The remedy; perhaps more valid arms, 
Weapons more violent, when next we meet, 
May serve to better us, and worse our foes, 
Or equal what between us made the odds, 
In nature none:  If other hidden cause 
Left them superiour, while we can preserve 
Unhurt our minds, and understanding sound, 
Due search and consultation will disclose. He sat; and in the assembly next upstood 
Nisroch, of Principalities the prime; 
As one he stood escaped from cruel fight, 
Sore toiled, his riven arms to havock hewn, 
And cloudy in aspect thus answering spake. Deliverer from new Lords, leader to free 
Enjoyment of our right as Gods; yet hard 
For Gods, and too unequal work we find, 
Against unequal arms to fight in pain, 
Against unpained, impassive; from which evil 
Ruin must needs ensue; for what avails 
Valour or strength, though matchless, quelled with pain 
Which all subdues, and makes remiss the hands 
Of mightiest? Sense of pleasure we may well 
Spare out of life perhaps, and not repine, 
But live content, which is the calmest life: 
But pain is perfect misery, the worst 
Of evils, and, excessive, overturns 
All patience. He, who therefore can invent 
With what more forcible we may offend 
Our yet unwounded enemies, or arm 
Ourselves with like defence, to me deserves 
No less than for deliverance what we owe. Whereto with look composed Satan replied. Not uninvented that, which thou aright 
Believest so main to our success, I bring. Which of us who beholds the bright surface 
Of this ethereous mould whereon we stand, 
This continent of spacious Heaven, adorned 
With plant, fruit, flower ambrosial, gems, and gold; 
Whose eye so superficially surveys 
These things, as not to mind from whence they grow 
Deep under ground, materials dark and crude, 
Of spiritous and fiery spume, till touched 
With Heaven's ray, and tempered, they shoot forth 
So beauteous, opening to the ambient light? These in their dark nativity the deep 
Shall yield us, pregnant with infernal flame; 
Which, into hollow engines, long and round, 
Thick rammed, at the other bore with touch of fire 
Dilated and infuriate, shall send forth 
From far, with thundering noise, among our foes 
Such implements of mischief, as shall dash 
To pieces, and o'erwhelm whatever stands 
Adverse, that they shall fear we have disarmed 
The Thunderer of his only dreaded bolt. Nor long shall be our labour; yet ere dawn, 
Effect shall end our wish. Mean while revive; 
Abandon fear; to strength and counsel joined 
Think nothing hard, much less to be despaired. He ended, and his words their drooping cheer 
Enlightened, and their languished hope revived. The invention all admired, and each, how he 
To be the inventer missed; so easy it seemed 
Once found, which yet unfound most would have thought 
Impossible:  Yet, haply, of thy race 
In future days, if malice should abound, 
Some one intent on mischief, or inspired 
With devilish machination, might devise 
Like instrument to plague the sons of men 
For sin, on war and mutual slaughter bent. Forthwith from council to the work they flew; 
None arguing stood; innumerable hands 
Were ready; in a moment up they turned 
Wide the celestial soil, and saw beneath 
The originals of nature in their crude 
Conception; sulphurous and nitrous foam 
They found, they mingled, and, with subtle art, 
Concocted and adusted they reduced 
To blackest grain, and into store conveyed: 
Part hidden veins digged up (nor hath this earth 
Entrails unlike) of mineral and stone, 
Whereof to found their engines and their balls 
Of missive ruin; part incentive reed 
Provide, pernicious with one touch to fire. So all ere day-spring, under conscious night, 
Secret they finished, and in order set, 
With silent circumspection, unespied. Now when fair morn orient in Heaven appeared, 
Up rose the victor-Angels, and to arms 
The matin trumpet sung:  In arms they stood 
Of golden panoply, refulgent host, 
Soon banded; others from the dawning hills 
Look round, and scouts each coast light-armed scour, 
Each quarter to descry the distant foe, 
Where lodged, or whither fled, or if for fight, 
In motion or in halt:  Him soon they met 
Under spread ensigns moving nigh, in slow 
But firm battalion; back with speediest sail 
Zophiel, of Cherubim the swiftest wing, 
Came flying, and in mid air aloud thus cried. Arm, Warriours, arm for fight; the foe at hand, 
Whom fled we thought, will save us long pursuit 
This day; fear not his flight;so thick a cloud 
He comes, and settled in his face I see 
Sad resolution, and secure:  Let each 
His adamantine coat gird well, and each 
Fit well his helm, gripe fast his orbed shield, 
Borne even or high; for this day will pour down, 
If I conjecture aught, no drizzling shower, 
But rattling storm of arrows barbed with fire. So warned he them, aware themselves, and soon 
In order, quit of all impediment; 
Instant without disturb they took alarm, 
And onward moved embattled:  When behold! Not distant far with heavy pace the foe 
Approaching gross and huge, in hollow cube 
Training his devilish enginery, impaled 
On every side with shadowing squadrons deep, 
To hide the fraud. At interview both stood 
A while; but suddenly at head appeared 
Satan, and thus was heard commanding loud. Vanguard, to right and left the front unfold; 
That all may see who hate us, how we seek 
Peace and composure, and with open breast 
Stand ready to receive them, if they like 
Our overture; and turn not back perverse: 
But that I doubt; however witness, Heaven! Heaven, witness thou anon! while we discharge 
Freely our part: ye, who appointed stand 
Do as you have in charge, and briefly touch 
What we propound, and loud that all may hear! So scoffing in ambiguous words, he scarce 
Had ended; when to right and left the front 
Divided, and to either flank retired: 
Which to our eyes discovered, new and strange, 
A triple mounted row of pillars laid 
On wheels (for like to pillars most they seemed, 
Or hollowed bodies made of oak or fir, 
With branches lopt, in wood or mountain felled,) 
Brass, iron, stony mould, had not their mouths 
With hideous orifice gaped on us wide, 
Portending hollow truce:  At each behind 
A Seraph stood, and in his hand a reed 
Stood waving tipt with fire; while we, suspense, 
Collected stood within our thoughts amused, 
Not long; for sudden all at once their reeds 
Put forth, and to a narrow vent applied 
With nicest touch. Immediate in a flame, 
But soon obscured with smoke, all Heaven appeared, 
From those deep-throated engines belched, whose roar 
Embowelled with outrageous noise the air, 
And all her entrails tore, disgorging foul 
Their devilish glut, chained thunderbolts and hail 
Of iron globes; which, on the victor host 
Levelled, with such impetuous fury smote, 
That, whom they hit, none on their feet might stand, 
Though standing else as rocks, but down they fell 
By thousands, Angel on Arch-Angel rolled; 
The sooner for their arms; unarmed, they might 
Have easily, as Spirits, evaded swift 
By quick contraction or remove; but now 
Foul dissipation followed, and forced rout; 
Nor served it to relax their serried files. What should they do? if on they rushed, repulse 
Repeated, and indecent overthrow 
Doubled, would render them yet more despised, 
And to their foes a laughter; for in view 
Stood ranked of Seraphim another row, 
In posture to displode their second tire 
Of thunder:  Back defeated to return 
They worse abhorred. Satan beheld their plight, 
And to his mates thus in derision called. O Friends! why come not on these victors proud 
Ere while they fierce were coming; and when we, 
To entertain them fair with open front 
And breast, (what could we more?) propounded terms 
Of composition, straight they changed their minds, 
Flew off, and into strange vagaries fell, 
As they would dance; yet for a dance they seemed 
Somewhat extravagant and wild; perhaps 
For joy of offered peace:  But I suppose, 
If our proposals once again were heard, 
We should compel them to a quick result. To whom thus Belial, in like gamesome mood. Leader! the terms we sent were terms of weight, 
Of hard contents, and full of force urged home; 
Such as we might perceive amused them all, 
And stumbled many:  Who receives them right, 
Had need from head to foot well understand; 
Not understood, this gift they have besides, 
They show us when our foes walk not upright. So they among themselves in pleasant vein 
Stood scoffing, hightened in their thoughts beyond 
All doubt of victory:  Eternal Might 
To match with their inventions they presumed 
So easy, and of his thunder made a scorn, 
And all his host derided, while they stood 
A while in trouble:  But they stood not long; 
Rage prompted them at length, and found them arms 
Against such hellish mischief fit to oppose. Forthwith (behold the excellence, the power, 
Which God hath in his mighty Angels placed!) Their arms away they threw, and to the hills 
(For Earth hath this variety from Heaven 
Of pleasure situate in hill and dale,) 
Light as the lightning glimpse they ran, they flew; 
From their foundations loosening to and fro, 
They plucked the seated hills, with all their load, 
Rocks, waters, woods, and by the shaggy tops 
Up-lifting bore them in their hands:  Amaze, 
Be sure, and terrour, seized the rebel host, 
When coming towards them so dread they saw 
The bottom of the mountains upward turned; 
Till on those cursed engines' triple-row 
They saw them whelmed, and all their confidence 
Under the weight of mountains buried deep; 
Themselves invaded next, and on their heads 
Main promontories flung, which in the air 
Came shadowing, and oppressed whole legions armed; 
Their armour helped their harm, crushed in and bruised 
Into their substance pent, which wrought them pain 
Implacable, and many a dolorous groan; 
Long struggling underneath, ere they could wind 
Out of such prison, though Spirits of purest light, 
Purest at first, now gross by sinning grown. The rest, in imitation, to like arms 
Betook them, and the neighbouring hills uptore: 
So hills amid the air encountered hills, 
Hurled to and fro with jaculation dire; 
That under ground they fought in dismal shade; 
Infernal noise! war seemed a civil game 
To this uproar; horrid confusion heaped 
Upon confusion rose:  And now all Heaven 
Had gone to wrack, with ruin overspread; 
Had not the Almighty Father, where he sits 
Shrined in his sanctuary of Heaven secure, 
Consulting on the sum of things, foreseen 
This tumult, and permitted all, advised: 
That his great purpose he might so fulfil, 
To honour his anointed Son avenged 
Upon his enemies, and to declare 
All power on him transferred:  Whence to his Son, 
The Assessour of his throne, he thus began. Effulgence of my glory, Son beloved, 
Son, in whose face invisible is beheld 
Visibly, what by Deity I am; 
And in whose hand what by decree I do, 
Second Omnipotence! two days are past, 
Two days, as we compute the days of Heaven, 
Since Michael and his Powers went forth to tame 
These disobedient:  Sore hath been their fight, 
As likeliest was, when two such foes met armed; 
For to themselves I left them; and thou knowest, 
Equal in their creation they were formed, 
Save what sin hath impaired; which yet hath wrought 
Insensibly, for I suspend their doom; 
Whence in perpetual fight they needs must last 
Endless, and no solution will be found: 
War wearied hath performed what war can do, 
And to disordered rage let loose the reins 
With mountains, as with weapons, armed; which makes 
Wild work in Heaven, and dangerous to the main. Two days are therefore past, the third is thine; 
For thee I have ordained it; and thus far 
Have suffered, that the glory may be thine 
Of ending this great war, since none but Thou 
Can end it. Into thee such virtue and grace 
Immense I have transfused, that all may know 
In Heaven and Hell thy power above compare; 
And, this perverse commotion governed thus, 
To manifest thee worthiest to be Heir 
Of all things; to be Heir, and to be King 
By sacred unction, thy deserved right. Go then, Thou Mightiest, in thy Father's might; 
Ascend my chariot, guide the rapid wheels 
That shake Heaven's basis, bring forth all my war, 
My bow and thunder, my almighty arms 
Gird on, and sword upon thy puissant thigh; 
Pursue these sons of darkness, drive them out 
From all Heaven's bounds into the utter deep: 
There let them learn, as likes them, to despise 
God, and Messiah his anointed King. He said, and on his Son with rays direct 
Shone full; he all his Father full expressed 
Ineffably into his face received; 
And thus the Filial Godhead answering spake. O Father, O Supreme of heavenly Thrones, 
First, Highest, Holiest, Best; thou always seek'st 
To glorify thy Son, I always thee, 
As is most just:  This I my glory account, 
My exaltation, and my whole delight, 
That thou, in me well pleased, declarest thy will 
Fulfilled, which to fulfil is all my bliss. Scepter and power, thy giving, I assume, 
And gladlier shall resign, when in the end 
Thou shalt be all in all, and I in thee 
For ever; and in me all whom thou lovest: 
But whom thou hatest, I hate, and can put on 
Thy terrours, as I put thy mildness on, 
Image of thee in all things; and shall soon, 
Armed with thy might, rid Heaven of these rebelled; 
To their prepared ill mansion driven down, 
To chains of darkness, and the undying worm; 
That from thy just obedience could revolt, 
Whom to obey is happiness entire. Then shall thy Saints unmixed, and from the impure 
Far separate, circling thy holy mount, 
Unfeigned Halleluiahs to thee sing, 
Hymns of high praise, and I among them Chief. So said, he, o'er his scepter bowing, rose 
From the right hand of Glory where he sat; 
And the third sacred morn began to shine, 
Dawning through Heaven. Forth rushed with whirlwind sound 
The chariot of Paternal Deity, 
Flashing thick flames, wheel within wheel undrawn, 
Itself instinct with Spirit, but convoyed 
By four Cherubick shapes; four faces each 
Had wonderous; as with stars, their bodies all 
And wings were set with eyes; with eyes the wheels 
Of beryl, and careering fires between; 
Over their heads a crystal firmament, 
Whereon a sapphire throne, inlaid with pure 
Amber, and colours of the showery arch. He, in celestial panoply all armed 
Of radiant Urim, work divinely wrought, 
Ascended; at his right hand Victory 
Sat eagle-winged; beside him hung his bow 
And quiver with three-bolted thunder stored; 
And from about him fierce effusion rolled 
Of smoke, and bickering flame, and sparkles dire: 
Attended with ten thousand thousand Saints, 
He onward came; far off his coming shone; 
And twenty thousand (I their number heard) 
Chariots of God, half on each hand, were seen; 
He on the wings of Cherub rode sublime 
On the crystalline sky, in sapphire throned, 
Illustrious far and wide; but by his own 
First seen:  Them unexpected joy surprised, 
When the great ensign of Messiah blazed 
Aloft by Angels borne, his sign in Heaven; 
Under whose conduct Michael soon reduced 
His army, circumfused on either wing, 
Under their Head imbodied all in one. Before him Power Divine his way prepared; 
At his command the uprooted hills retired 
Each to his place; they heard his voice, and went 
Obsequious; Heaven his wonted face renewed, 
And with fresh flowerets hill and valley smiled. This saw his hapless foes, but stood obdured, 
And to rebellious fight rallied their Powers, 
Insensate, hope conceiving from despair. In heavenly Spirits could such perverseness dwell? But to convince the proud what signs avail, 
Or wonders move the obdurate to relent? They, hardened more by what might most reclaim, 
Grieving to see his glory, at the sight 
Took envy; and, aspiring to his highth, 
Stood re-embattled fierce, by force or fraud 
Weening to prosper, and at length prevail 
Against God and Messiah, or to fall 
In universal ruin last; and now 
To final battle drew, disdaining flight, 
Or faint retreat; when the great Son of God 
To all his host on either hand thus spake. Stand still in bright array, ye Saints; here stand, 
Ye Angels armed; this day from battle rest: 
Faithful hath been your warfare, and of God 
Accepted, fearless in his righteous cause; 
And as ye have received, so have ye done, 
Invincibly:  But of this cursed crew 
The punishment to other hand belongs; 
Vengeance is his, or whose he sole appoints: 
Number to this day's work is not ordained, 
Nor multitude; stand only, and behold 
God's indignation on these godless poured 
By me; not you, but me, they have despised, 
Yet envied; against me is all their rage, 
Because the Father, to whom in Heaven s'preme 
Kingdom, and power, and glory appertains, 
Hath honoured me, according to his will. Therefore to me their doom he hath assigned; 
That they may have their wish, to try with me 
In battle which the stronger proves; they all, 
Or I alone against them; since by strength 
They measure all, of other excellence 
Not emulous, nor care who them excels; 
Nor other strife with them do I vouchsafe. So spake the Son, and into terrour changed 
His countenance too severe to be beheld, 
And full of wrath bent on his enemies. At once the Four spread out their starry wings 
With dreadful shade contiguous, and the orbs 
Of his fierce chariot rolled, as with the sound 
Of torrent floods, or of a numerous host. He on his impious foes right onward drove, 
Gloomy as night; under his burning wheels 
The stedfast empyrean shook throughout, 
All but the throne itself of God. Full soon 
Among them he arrived; in his right hand 
Grasping ten thousand thunders, which he sent 
Before him, such as in their souls infixed 
Plagues:  They, astonished, all resistance lost, 
All courage; down their idle weapons dropt: 
O'er shields, and helms, and helmed heads he rode 
Of Thrones and mighty Seraphim prostrate, 
That wished the mountains now might be again 
Thrown on them, as a shelter from his ire. Nor less on either side tempestuous fell 
His arrows, from the fourfold-visaged Four 
Distinct with eyes, and from the living wheels 
Distinct alike with multitude of eyes; 
One Spirit in them ruled; and every eye 
Glared lightning, and shot forth pernicious fire 
Among the accursed, that withered all their strength, 
And of their wonted vigour left them drained, 
Exhausted, spiritless, afflicted, fallen. Yet half his strength he put not forth, but checked 
His thunder in mid volley; for he meant 
Not to destroy, but root them out of Heaven: 
The overthrown he raised, and as a herd 
Of goats or timorous flock together thronged 
Drove them before him thunder-struck, pursued 
With terrours, and with furies, to the bounds 
And crystal wall of Heaven; which, opening wide, 
Rolled inward, and a spacious gap disclosed 
Into the wasteful deep:  The monstrous sight 
Struck them with horrour backward, but far worse 
Urged them behind:  Headlong themselves they threw 
Down from the verge of Heaven; eternal wrath 
Burnt after them to the bottomless pit. Hell heard the unsufferable noise, Hell saw 
Heaven ruining from Heaven, and would have fled 
Affrighted; but strict Fate had cast too deep 
Her dark foundations, and too fast had bound. Nine days they fell:  Confounded Chaos roared, 
And felt tenfold confusion in their fall 
Through his wild anarchy, so huge a rout 
Incumbered him with ruin:  Hell at last 
Yawning received them whole, and on them closed; 
Hell, their fit habitation, fraught with fire 
Unquenchable, the house of woe and pain. Disburdened Heaven rejoiced, and soon repaired 
Her mural breach, returning whence it rolled. Sole victor, from the expulsion of his foes, 
Messiah his triumphal chariot turned: 
To meet him all his Saints, who silent stood 
Eye-witnesses of his almighty acts, 
With jubilee advanced; and, as they went, 
Shaded with branching palm, each Order bright, 
Sung triumph, and him sung victorious King, 
Son, Heir, and Lord, to him dominion given, 
Worthiest to reign:  He, celebrated, rode 
Triumphant through mid Heaven, into the courts 
And temple of his Mighty Father throned 
On high; who into glory him received, 
Where now he sits at the right hand of bliss. Thus, measuring things in Heaven by things on Earth, 
At thy request, and that thou mayest beware 
By what is past, to thee I have revealed 
What might have else to human race been hid; 
The discord which befel, and war in Heaven 
Among the angelick Powers, and the deep fall 
Of those too high aspiring, who rebelled 
With Satan; he who envies now thy state, 
Who now is plotting how he may seduce 
Thee also from obedience, that, with him 
Bereaved of happiness, thou mayest partake 
His punishment, eternal misery; 
Which would be all his solace and revenge, 
As a despite done against the Most High, 
Thee once to gain companion of his woe. But listen not to his temptations, warn 
Thy weaker; let it profit thee to have heard, 
By terrible example, the reward 
Of disobedience; firm they might have stood, 
Yet fell; remember, and fear to transgress. Book VII                                                         
 
 
Descend from Heaven, Urania, by that name 
If rightly thou art called, whose voice divine 
Following, above the Olympian hill I soar, 
Above the flight of Pegasean wing! The meaning, not the name, I call: for thou 
Nor of the Muses nine, nor on the top 
Of old Olympus dwellest; but, heavenly-born, 
Before the hills appeared, or fountain flowed, 
Thou with eternal Wisdom didst converse, 
Wisdom thy sister, and with her didst play 
In presence of the Almighty Father, pleased 
With thy celestial song. Up led by thee 
Into the Heaven of Heavens I have presumed, 
An earthly guest, and drawn empyreal air, 
Thy tempering: with like safety guided down 
Return me to my native element: 
Lest from this flying steed unreined, (as once 
Bellerophon, though from a lower clime,) 
Dismounted, on the Aleian field I fall, 
Erroneous there to wander, and forlorn. Half yet remains unsung, but narrower bound 
Within the visible diurnal sphere; 
Standing on earth, not rapt above the pole, 
More safe I sing with mortal voice, unchanged 
To hoarse or mute, though fallen on evil days, 
On evil days though fallen, and evil tongues; 
In darkness, and with dangers compassed round, 
And solitude; yet not alone, while thou 
Visitest my slumbers nightly, or when morn 
Purples the east: still govern thou my song, 
Urania, and fit audience find, though few. But drive far off the barbarous dissonance 
Of Bacchus and his revellers, the race 
Of that wild rout that tore the Thracian bard 
In Rhodope, where woods and rocks had ears 
To rapture, till the savage clamour drowned 
Both harp and voice; nor could the Muse defend 
Her son. So fail not thou, who thee implores: 
For thou art heavenly, she an empty dream. Say, Goddess, what ensued when Raphael, 
The affable Arch-Angel, had forewarned 
Adam, by dire example, to beware 
Apostasy, by what befel in Heaven 
To those apostates; lest the like befall 
In Paradise to Adam or his race, 
Charged not to touch the interdicted tree, 
If they transgress, and slight that sole command, 
So easily obeyed amid the choice 
Of all tastes else to please their appetite, 
Though wandering. He, with his consorted Eve, 
The story heard attentive, and was filled 
With admiration and deep muse, to hear 
Of things so high and strange; things, to their thought 
So unimaginable, as hate in Heaven, 
And war so near the peace of God in bliss, 
With such confusion: but the evil, soon 
Driven back, redounded as a flood on those 
From whom it sprung; impossible to mix 
With blessedness. Whence Adam soon repealed 
The doubts that in his heart arose: and now 
Led on, yet sinless, with desire to know 
What nearer might concern him, how this world 
Of Heaven and Earth conspicuous first began; 
When, and whereof created; for what cause; 
What within Eden, or without, was done 
Before his memory; as one whose drouth 
Yet scarce allayed still eyes the current stream, 
Whose liquid murmur heard new thirst excites, 
Proceeded thus to ask his heavenly guest. Great things, and full of wonder in our ears, 
Far differing from this world, thou hast revealed, 
Divine interpreter! by favour sent 
Down from the empyrean, to forewarn 
Us timely of what might else have been our loss, 
Unknown, which human knowledge could not reach; 
For which to the infinitely Good we owe 
Immortal thanks, and his admonishment 
Receive, with solemn purpose to observe 
Immutably his sovran will, the end 
Of what we are. But since thou hast vouchsafed 
Gently, for our instruction, to impart 
Things above earthly thought, which yet concerned 
Our knowing, as to highest wisdom seemed, 
Deign to descend now lower, and relate 
What may no less perhaps avail us known, 
How first began this Heaven which we behold 
Distant so high, with moving fires adorned 
Innumerable; and this which yields or fills 
All space, the ambient air wide interfused 
Embracing round this floried Earth; what cause 
Moved the Creator, in his holy rest 
Through all eternity, so late to build 
In Chaos; and the work begun, how soon 
Absolved; if unforbid thou mayest unfold 
What we, not to explore the secrets ask 
Of his eternal empire, but the more 
To magnify his works, the more we know. And the great light of day yet wants to run 
Much of his race though steep; suspense in Heaven, 
Held by thy voice, thy potent voice, he hears, 
And longer will delay to hear thee tell 
His generation, and the rising birth 
Of Nature from the unapparent Deep: 
Or if the star of evening and the moon 
Haste to thy audience, Night with her will bring, 
Silence; and Sleep, listening to thee, will watch; 
Or we can bid his absence, till thy song 
End, and dismiss thee ere the morning shine. Thus Adam his illustrious guest besought: 
And thus the Godlike Angel answered mild. This also thy request, with caution asked, 
Obtain; though to recount almighty works 
What words or tongue of Seraph can suffice, 
Or heart of man suffice to comprehend? Yet what thou canst attain, which best may serve 
To glorify the Maker, and infer 
Thee also happier, shall not be withheld 
Thy hearing; such commission from above 
I have received, to answer thy desire 
Of knowledge within bounds; beyond, abstain 
To ask; nor let thine own inventions hope 
Things not revealed, which the invisible King, 
Only Omniscient, hath suppressed in night; 
To none communicable in Earth or Heaven: 
Enough is left besides to search and know. But knowledge is as food, and needs no less 
Her temperance over appetite, to know 
In measure what the mind may well contain; 
Oppresses else with surfeit, and soon turns 
Wisdom to folly, as nourishment to wind. Know then, that, after Lucifer from Heaven 
(So call him, brighter once amidst the host 
Of Angels, than that star the stars among,) 
Fell with his flaming legions through the deep 
Into his place, and the great Son returned 
Victorious with his Saints, the Omnipotent 
Eternal Father from his throne beheld 
Their multitude, and to his Son thus spake. At least our envious Foe hath failed, who thought 
All like himself rebellious, by whose aid 
This inaccessible high strength, the seat 
Of Deity supreme, us dispossessed, 
He trusted to have seised, and into fraud 
Drew many, whom their place knows here no more: 
Yet far the greater part have kept, I see, 
Their station; Heaven, yet populous, retains 
Number sufficient to possess her realms 
Though wide, and this high temple to frequent 
With ministeries due, and solemn rites: 
But, lest his heart exalt him in the harm 
Already done, to have dispeopled Heaven, 
My damage fondly deemed, I can repair 
That detriment, if such it be to lose 
Self-lost; and in a moment will create 
Another world, out of one man a race 
Of men innumerable, there to dwell, 
Not here; till, by degrees of merit raised, 
They open to themselves at length the way 
Up hither, under long obedience tried; 
And Earth be changed to Heaven, and Heaven to Earth, 
One kingdom, joy and union without end. Mean while inhabit lax, ye Powers of Heaven; 
And thou my Word, begotten Son, by thee 
This I perform; speak thou, and be it done! My overshadowing Spirit and Might with thee 
I send along; ride forth, and bid the Deep 
Within appointed bounds be Heaven and Earth; 
Boundless the Deep, because I Am who fill 
Infinitude, nor vacuous the space. Though I, uncircumscribed myself, retire, 
And put not forth my goodness, which is free 
To act or not, Necessity and Chance 
Approach not me, and what I will is Fate. So spake the Almighty, and to what he spake 
His Word, the Filial Godhead, gave effect. Immediate are the acts of God, more swift 
Than time or motion, but to human ears 
Cannot without process of speech be told, 
So told as earthly notion can receive. Great triumph and rejoicing was in Heaven, 
When such was heard declared the Almighty's will; 
Glory they sung to the Most High, good will 
To future men, and in their dwellings peace; 
Glory to Him, whose just avenging ire 
Had driven out the ungodly from his sight 
And the habitations of the just; to Him 
Glory and praise, whose wisdom had ordained 
Good out of evil to create; instead 
Of Spirits malign, a better race to bring 
Into their vacant room, and thence diffuse 
His good to worlds and ages infinite. So sang the Hierarchies:  Mean while the Son 
On his great expedition now appeared, 
Girt with Omnipotence, with radiance crowned 
Of Majesty Divine; sapience and love 
Immense, and all his Father in him shone. About his chariot numberless were poured 
Cherub, and Seraph, Potentates, and Thrones, 
And Virtues, winged Spirits, and chariots winged 
From the armoury of God; where stand of old 
Myriads, between two brazen mountains lodged 
Against a solemn day, harnessed at hand, 
Celestial equipage; and now came forth 
Spontaneous, for within them Spirit lived, 
Attendant on their Lord:  Heaven opened wide 
Her ever-during gates, harmonious sound 
On golden hinges moving, to let forth 
The King of Glory, in his powerful Word 
And Spirit, coming to create new worlds. On heavenly ground they stood; and from the shore 
They viewed the vast immeasurable abyss 
Outrageous as a sea, dark, wasteful, wild, 
Up from the bottom turned by furious winds 
And surging waves, as mountains, to assault 
Heaven's highth, and with the center mix the pole. Silence, ye troubled Waves, and thou Deep, peace, 
Said then the Omnifick Word; your discord end! Nor staid; but, on the wings of Cherubim 
Uplifted, in paternal glory rode 
Far into Chaos, and the world unborn; 
For Chaos heard his voice:  Him all his train 
Followed in bright procession, to behold 
Creation, and the wonders of his might. Then staid the fervid wheels, and in his hand 
He took the golden compasses, prepared 
In God's eternal store, to circumscribe 
This universe, and all created things: 
One foot he centered, and the other turned 
Round through the vast profundity obscure; 
And said, Thus far extend, thus far thy bounds, 
This be thy just circumference, O World! Thus God the Heaven created, thus the Earth, 
Matter unformed and void:  Darkness profound 
Covered the abyss: but on the watery calm 
His brooding wings the Spirit of God outspread, 
And vital virtue infused, and vital warmth 
Throughout the fluid mass; but downward purged 
The black tartareous cold infernal dregs, 
Adverse to life: then founded, then conglobed 
Like things to like; the rest to several place 
Disparted, and between spun out the air; 
And Earth self-balanced on her center hung. Let there be light, said God; and forthwith Light 
Ethereal, first of things, quintessence pure, 
Sprung from the deep; and from her native east 
To journey through the aery gloom began, 
Sphered in a radiant cloud, for yet the sun 
Was not; she in a cloudy tabernacle 
Sojourned the while. God saw the light was good; 
And light from darkness by the hemisphere 
Divided: light the Day, and darkness Night, 
He named. Thus was the first day even and morn: 
Nor past uncelebrated, nor unsung 
By the celestial quires, when orient light 
Exhaling first from darkness they beheld; 
Birth-day of Heaven and Earth; with joy and shout 
The hollow universal orb they filled, 
And touched their golden harps, and hymning praised 
God and his works; Creator him they sung, 
Both when first evening was, and when first morn. Again, God said,  Let there be firmament 
Amid the waters, and let it divide 
The waters from the waters; and God made 
The firmament, expanse of liquid, pure, 
Transparent, elemental air, diffused 
In circuit to the uttermost convex 
Of this great round; partition firm and sure, 
The waters underneath from those above 
Dividing: for as earth, so he the world 
Built on circumfluous waters calm, in wide 
Crystalline ocean, and the loud misrule 
Of Chaos far removed; lest fierce extremes 
Contiguous might distemper the whole frame: 
And Heaven he named the Firmament:  So even 
And morning chorus sung the second day. The Earth was formed, but in the womb as yet 
Of waters, embryon immature involved, 
Appeared not: over all the face of Earth 
Main ocean flowed, not idle; but, with warm 
Prolifick humour softening all her globe, 
Fermented the great mother to conceive, 
Satiate with genial moisture; when God said, 
Be gathered now ye waters under Heaven 
Into one place, and let dry land appear. Immediately the mountains huge appear 
Emergent, and their broad bare backs upheave 
Into the clouds; their tops ascend the sky: 
So high as heaved the tumid hills, so low 
Down sunk a hollow bottom broad and deep, 
Capacious bed of waters:  Thither they 
Hasted with glad precipitance, uprolled, 
As drops on dust conglobing from the dry: 
Part rise in crystal wall, or ridge direct, 
For haste; such flight the great command impressed 
On the swift floods:  As armies at the call 
Of trumpet (for of armies thou hast heard) 
Troop to their standard; so the watery throng, 
Wave rolling after wave, where way they found, 
If steep, with torrent rapture, if through plain, 
Soft-ebbing; nor withstood them rock or hill; 
But they, or under ground, or circuit wide 
With serpent errour wandering, found their way, 
And on the washy oose deep channels wore; 
Easy, ere God had bid the ground be dry, 
All but within those banks, where rivers now 
Stream, and perpetual draw their humid train. The dry land, Earth; and the great receptacle 
Of congregated waters, he called Seas: 
And saw that it was good; and said, Let the Earth 
Put forth the verdant grass, herb yielding seed, 
And fruit-tree yielding fruit after her kind, 
Whose seed is in herself upon the Earth. He scarce had said, when the bare Earth, till then 
Desart and bare, unsightly, unadorned, 
Brought forth the tender grass, whose verdure clad 
Her universal face with pleasant green; 
Then herbs of every leaf, that sudden flowered 
Opening their various colours, and made gay 
Her bosom, smelling sweet: and, these scarce blown, 
Forth flourished thick the clustering vine, forth crept 
The swelling gourd, up stood the corny reed 
Embattled in her field, and the humble shrub, 
And bush with frizzled hair implicit:  Last 
Rose, as in dance, the stately trees, and spread 
Their branches hung with copious fruit, or gemmed 
Their blossoms:  With high woods the hills were crowned; 
With tufts the valleys, and each fountain side; 
With borders long the rivers: that Earth now 
Seemed like to Heaven, a seat where Gods might dwell, 
Or wander with delight, and love to haunt 
Her sacred shades: though God had yet not rained 
Upon the Earth, and man to till the ground 
None was; but from the Earth a dewy mist 
Went up, and watered all the ground, and each 
Plant of the field; which, ere it was in the Earth, 
God made, and every herb, before it grew 
On the green stem:  God saw that it was good: 
So even and morn recorded the third day. Again the Almighty spake, Let there be lights 
High in the expanse of Heaven, to divide 
The day from night; and let them be for signs, 
For seasons, and for days, and circling years; 
And let them be for lights, as I ordain 
Their office in the firmament of Heaven, 
To give light on the Earth; and it was so. And God made two great lights, great for their use 
To Man, the greater to have rule by day, 
The less by night, altern; and made the stars, 
And set them in the firmament of Heaven 
To illuminate the Earth, and rule the day 
In their vicissitude, and rule the night, 
And light from darkness to divide. God saw, 
Surveying his great work, that it was good: 
For of celestial bodies first the sun 
A mighty sphere he framed, unlightsome first, 
Though of ethereal mould: then formed the moon 
Globose, and every magnitude of stars, 
And sowed with stars the Heaven, thick as a field: 
Of light by far the greater part he took, 
Transplanted from her cloudy shrine, and placed 
In the sun's orb, made porous to receive 
And drink the liquid light; firm to retain 
Her gathered beams, great palace now of light. Hither, as to their fountain, other stars 
Repairing, in their golden urns draw light, 
And hence the morning-planet gilds her horns; 
By tincture or reflection they augment 
Their small peculiar, though from human sight 
So far remote, with diminution seen, 
First in his east the glorious lamp was seen, 
Regent of day, and all the horizon round 
Invested with bright rays, jocund to run 
His longitude through Heaven's high road; the gray 
Dawn, and the Pleiades, before him danced, 
Shedding sweet influence:  Less bright the moon, 
But opposite in levelled west was set, 
His mirrour, with full face borrowing her light 
From him; for other light she needed none 
In that aspect, and still that distance keeps 
Till night; then in the east her turn she shines, 
Revolved on Heaven's great axle, and her reign 
With thousand lesser lights dividual holds, 
With thousand thousand stars, that then appeared 
Spangling the hemisphere:  Then first adorned 
With their bright luminaries that set and rose, 
Glad evening and glad morn crowned the fourth day. And God said, Let the waters generate 
Reptile with spawn abundant, living soul: 
And let fowl fly above the Earth, with wings 
Displayed on the open firmament of Heaven. And God created the great whales, and each 
Soul living, each that crept, which plenteously 
The waters generated by their kinds; 
And every bird of wing after his kind; 
And saw that it was good, and blessed them, saying. Be fruitful, multiply, and in the seas, 
And lakes, and running streams, the waters fill; 
And let the fowl be multiplied, on the Earth. Forthwith the sounds and seas, each creek and bay, 
With fry innumerable swarm, and shoals 
Of fish that with their fins, and shining scales, 
Glide under the green wave, in sculls that oft 
Bank the mid sea: part single, or with mate, 
Graze the sea-weed their pasture, and through groves 
Of coral stray; or, sporting with quick glance, 
Show to the sun their waved coats dropt with gold; 
Or, in their pearly shells at ease, attend 
Moist nutriment; or under rocks their food 
In jointed armour watch: on smooth the seal 
And bended dolphins play: part huge of bulk 
Wallowing unwieldy, enormous in their gait, 
Tempest the ocean: there leviathan, 
Hugest of living creatures, on the deep 
Stretched like a promontory sleeps or swims, 
And seems a moving land; and at his gills 
Draws in, and at his trunk spouts out, a sea. Mean while the tepid caves, and fens, and shores, 
Their brood as numerous hatch, from the egg that soon 
Bursting with kindly rupture forth disclosed 
Their callow young; but feathered soon and fledge 
They summed their pens; and, soaring the air sublime, 
With clang despised the ground, under a cloud 
In prospect; there the eagle and the stork 
On cliffs and cedar tops their eyries build: 
Part loosely wing the region, part more wise 
In common, ranged in figure, wedge their way, 
Intelligent of seasons, and set forth 
Their aery caravan, high over seas 
Flying, and over lands, with mutual wing 
Easing their flight; so steers the prudent crane 
Her annual voyage, borne on winds; the air 
Floats as they pass, fanned with unnumbered plumes: 
From branch to branch the smaller birds with song 
Solaced the woods, and spread their painted wings 
Till even; nor then the solemn nightingale 
Ceased warbling, but all night tun'd her soft lays: 
Others, on silver lakes and rivers, bathed 
Their downy breast; the swan with arched neck, 
Between her white wings mantling proudly, rows 
Her state with oary feet; yet oft they quit 
The dank, and, rising on stiff pennons, tower 
The mid aereal sky:  Others on ground 
Walked firm; the crested cock whose clarion sounds 
The silent hours, and the other whose gay train 
Adorns him, coloured with the florid hue 
Of rainbows and starry eyes. The waters thus 
With fish replenished, and the air with fowl, 
Evening and morn solemnized the fifth day. The sixth, and of creation last, arose 
With evening harps and matin; when God said, 
Let the Earth bring forth soul living in her kind, 
Cattle, and creeping things, and beast of the Earth, 
Each in their kind. The Earth obeyed, and straight 
Opening her fertile womb teemed at a birth 
Innumerous living creatures, perfect forms, 
Limbed and full grown:  Out of the ground up rose, 
As from his lair, the wild beast where he wons 
In forest wild, in thicket, brake, or den; 
Among the trees in pairs they rose, they walked: 
The cattle in the fields and meadows green: 
Those rare and solitary, these in flocks 
Pasturing at once, and in broad herds upsprung. The grassy clods now calved; now half appeared 
The tawny lion, pawing to get free 
His hinder parts, then springs as broke from bonds, 
And rampant shakes his brinded mane; the ounce, 
The libbard, and the tiger, as the mole 
Rising, the crumbled earth above them threw 
In hillocks:  The swift stag from under ground 
Bore up his branching head:  Scarce from his mould 
Behemoth biggest born of earth upheaved 
His vastness:  Fleeced the flocks and bleating rose, 
As plants:  Ambiguous between sea and land 
The river-horse, and scaly crocodile. At once came forth whatever creeps the ground, 
Insect or worm: those waved their limber fans 
For wings, and smallest lineaments exact 
In all the liveries decked of summer's pride 
With spots of gold and purple, azure and green: 
These, as a line, their long dimension drew, 
Streaking the ground with sinuous trace; not all 
Minims of nature; some of serpent-kind, 
Wonderous in length and corpulence, involved 
Their snaky folds, and added wings. First crept 
The parsimonious emmet, provident 
Of future; in small room large heart enclosed; 
Pattern of just equality perhaps 
Hereafter, joined in her popular tribes 
Of commonalty:  Swarming next appeared 
The female bee, that feeds her husband drone 
Deliciously, and builds her waxen cells 
With honey stored:  The rest are numberless, 
And thou their natures knowest, and gavest them names, 
Needless to thee repeated; nor unknown 
The serpent, subtlest beast of all the field, 
Of huge extent sometimes, with brazen eyes 
And hairy mane terrifick, though to thee 
Not noxious, but obedient at thy call. Now Heaven in all her glory shone, and rolled 
Her motions, as the great first Mover's hand 
First wheeled their course:  Earth in her rich attire 
Consummate lovely smiled; air, water, earth, 
By fowl, fish, beast, was flown, was swum, was walked, 
Frequent; and of the sixth day yet remained: 
There wanted yet the master-work, the end 
Of all yet done; a creature, who, not prone 
And brute as other creatures, but endued 
With sanctity of reason, might erect 
His stature, and upright with front serene 
Govern the rest, self-knowing; and from thence 
Magnanimous to correspond with Heaven, 
But grateful to acknowledge whence his good 
Descends, thither with heart, and voice, and eyes 
Directed in devotion, to adore 
And worship God Supreme, who made him chief 
Of all his works:  therefore the Omnipotent 
Eternal Father (for where is not he 
Present?) thus to his Son audibly spake. Let us make now Man in our image, Man 
In our similitude, and let them rule 
Over the fish and fowl of sea and air, 
Beast of the field, and over all the Earth, 
And every creeping thing that creeps the ground. This said, he formed thee, Adam, thee, O Man, 
Dust of the ground, and in thy nostrils breathed 
The breath of life; in his own image he 
Created thee, in the image of God 
Express; and thou becamest a living soul. Male he created thee; but thy consort 
Female, for race; then blessed mankind, and said, 
Be fruitful, multiply, and fill the Earth; 
Subdue it, and throughout dominion hold 
Over fish of the sea, and fowl of the air, 
And every living thing that moves on the Earth. Wherever thus created, for no place 
Is yet distinct by name, thence, as thou knowest, 
He brought thee into this delicious grove, 
This garden, planted with the trees of God, 
Delectable both to behold and taste; 
And freely all their pleasant fruit for food 
Gave thee; all sorts are here that all the Earth yields, 
Variety without end; but of the tree, 
Which, tasted, works knowledge of good and evil, 
Thou mayest not; in the day thou eatest, thou diest; 
Death is the penalty imposed; beware, 
And govern well thy appetite; lest Sin 
Surprise thee, and her black attendant Death. Here finished he, and all that he had made 
Viewed, and behold all was entirely good; 
So even and morn accomplished the sixth day: 
Yet not till the Creator from his work 
Desisting, though unwearied, up returned, 
Up to the Heaven of Heavens, his high abode; 
Thence to behold this new created world, 
The addition of his empire, how it showed 
In prospect from his throne, how good, how fair, 
Answering his great idea. Up he rode 
Followed with acclamation, and the sound 
Symphonious of ten thousand harps, that tuned 
Angelick harmonies:  The earth, the air 
Resounded, (thou rememberest, for thou heardst,) 
The heavens and all the constellations rung, 
The planets in their station listening stood, 
While the bright pomp ascended jubilant. Open, ye everlasting gates! they sung, 
Open, ye Heavens! your living doors;let in 
The great Creator from his work returned 
Magnificent, his six days work, a World; 
Open, and henceforth oft; for God will deign 
To visit oft the dwellings of just men, 
Delighted; and with frequent intercourse 
Thither will send his winged messengers 
On errands of supernal grace. So sung 
The glorious train ascending:  He through Heaven, 
That opened wide her blazing portals, led 
To God's eternal house direct the way; 
A broad and ample road, whose dust is gold 
And pavement stars, as stars to thee appear, 
Seen in the galaxy, that milky way, 
Which nightly, as a circling zone, thou seest 
Powdered with stars. And now on Earth the seventh 
Evening arose in Eden, for the sun 
Was set, and twilight from the east came on, 
Forerunning night; when at the holy mount 
Of Heaven's high-seated top, the imperial throne 
Of Godhead, fixed for ever firm and sure, 
The Filial Power arrived, and sat him down 
With his great Father; for he also went 
Invisible, yet staid, (such privilege 
Hath Omnipresence) and the work ordained, 
Author and End of all things; and, from work 
Now resting, blessed and hallowed the seventh day, 
As resting on that day from all his work, 
But not in silence holy kept: the harp 
Had work and rested not; the solemn pipe, 
And dulcimer, all organs of sweet stop, 
All sounds on fret by string or golden wire, 
Tempered soft tunings, intermixed with voice 
Choral or unison: of incense clouds, 
Fuming from golden censers, hid the mount. Creation and the six days acts they sung: 
Great are thy works, Jehovah! infinite 
Thy power! what thought can measure thee, or tongue 
Relate thee! Greater now in thy return 
Than from the giant Angels:  Thee that day 
Thy thunders magnified; but to create 
Is greater than created to destroy. Who can impair thee, Mighty King, or bound 
Thy empire! Easily the proud attempt 
Of Spirits apostate, and their counsels vain, 
Thou hast repelled; while impiously they thought 
Thee to diminish, and from thee withdraw 
The number of thy worshippers. Who seeks 
To lessen thee, against his purpose serves 
To manifest the more thy might: his evil 
Thou usest, and from thence createst more good. Witness this new-made world, another Heaven 
From Heaven-gate not far, founded in view 
On the clear hyaline, the glassy sea; 
Of amplitude almost immense, with stars 
Numerous, and every star perhaps a world 
Of destined habitation; but thou knowest 
Their seasons: among these the seat of Men, 
Earth, with her nether ocean circumfused, 
Their pleasant dwelling-place. Thrice happy Men, 
And sons of Men, whom God hath thus advanced! Created in his image, there to dwell 
And worship him; and in reward to rule 
Over his works, on earth, in sea, or air, 
And multiply a race of worshippers 
Holy and just:  Thrice happy, if they know 
Their happiness, and persevere upright! So sung they, and the empyrean rung 
With halleluiahs:  Thus was sabbath kept. And thy request think now fulfilled, that asked 
How first this world and face of things began, 
And what before thy memory was done 
From the beginning; that posterity, 
Informed by thee, might know:  If else thou seekest 
Aught, not surpassing human measure, say. Book VIII                                                        
 
 
The Angel ended, and in Adam's ear 
So charming left his voice, that he a while 
Thought him still speaking, still stood fixed to hear; 
Then, as new waked, thus gratefully replied. What thanks sufficient, or what recompence 
Equal, have I to render thee, divine 
Historian, who thus largely hast allayed 
The thirst I had of knowledge, and vouchsafed 
This friendly condescension to relate 
Things, else by me unsearchable; now heard 
With wonder, but delight, and, as is due, 
With glory attributed to the high 
Creator! Something yet of doubt remains, 
Which only thy solution can resolve. When I behold this goodly frame, this world, 
Of Heaven and Earth consisting; and compute 
Their magnitudes; this Earth, a spot, a grain, 
An atom, with the firmament compared 
And all her numbered stars, that seem to roll 
Spaces incomprehensible, (for such 
Their distance argues, and their swift return 
Diurnal,) merely to officiate light 
Round this opacous Earth, this punctual spot, 
One day and night; in all her vast survey 
Useless besides; reasoning I oft admire, 
How Nature wise and frugal could commit 
Such disproportions, with superfluous hand 
So many nobler bodies to create, 
Greater so manifold, to this one use, 
For aught appears, and on their orbs impose 
Such restless revolution day by day 
Repeated; while the sedentary Earth, 
That better might with far less compass move, 
Served by more noble than herself, attains 
Her end without least motion, and receives, 
As tribute, such a sumless journey brought 
Of incorporeal speed, her warmth and light; 
Speed, to describe whose swiftness number fails. So spake our sire, and by his countenance seemed 
Entering on studious thoughts abstruse; which Eve 
Perceiving, where she sat retired in sight, 
With lowliness majestick from her seat, 
And grace that won who saw to wish her stay, 
Rose, and went forth among her fruits and flowers, 
To visit how they prospered, bud and bloom, 
Her nursery; they at her coming sprung, 
And, touched by her fair tendance, gladlier grew. Yet went she not, as not with such discourse 
Delighted, or not capable her ear 
Of what was high: such pleasure she reserved, 
Adam relating, she sole auditress; 
Her husband the relater she preferred 
Before the Angel, and of him to ask 
Chose rather; he, she knew, would intermix 
Grateful digressions, and solve high dispute 
With conjugal caresses: from his lip 
Not words alone pleased her. O! when meet now 
Such pairs, in love and mutual honour joined? With Goddess-like demeanour forth she went, 
Not unattended; for on her, as Queen, 
A pomp of winning Graces waited still, 
And from about her shot darts of desire 
Into all eyes, to wish her still in sight. And Raphael now, to Adam's doubt proposed, 
Benevolent and facile thus replied. To ask or search, I blame thee not; for Heaven 
Is as the book of God before thee set, 
Wherein to read his wonderous works, and learn 
His seasons, hours, or days, or months, or years: 
This to attain, whether Heaven move or Earth, 
Imports not, if thou reckon right; the rest 
From Man or Angel the great Architect 
Did wisely to conceal, and not divulge 
His secrets to be scanned by them who ought 
Rather admire; or, if they list to try 
Conjecture, he his fabrick of the Heavens 
Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move 
His laughter at their quaint opinions wide 
Hereafter; when they come to model Heaven 
And calculate the stars, how they will wield 
The mighty frame; how build, unbuild, contrive 
To save appearances; how gird the sphere 
With centrick and eccentrick scribbled o'er, 
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb: 
Already by thy reasoning this I guess, 
Who art to lead thy offspring, and supposest 
That bodies bright and greater should not serve 
The less not bright, nor Heaven such journeys run, 
Earth sitting still, when she alone receives 
The benefit:  Consider first, that great 
Or bright infers not excellence: the Earth 
Though, in comparison of Heaven, so small, 
Nor glistering, may of solid good contain 
More plenty than the sun that barren shines; 
Whose virtue on itself works no effect, 
But in the fruitful Earth; there first received, 
His beams, unactive else, their vigour find. Yet not to Earth are those bright luminaries 
Officious; but to thee, Earth's habitant. And for the Heaven's wide circuit, let it speak 
The Maker's high magnificence, who built 
So spacious, and his line stretched out so far; 
That Man may know he dwells not in his own; 
An edifice too large for him to fill, 
Lodged in a small partition; and the rest 
Ordained for uses to his Lord best known. The swiftness of those circles attribute, 
Though numberless, to his Omnipotence, 
That to corporeal substances could add 
Speed almost spiritual:  Me thou thinkest not slow, 
Who since the morning-hour set out from Heaven 
Where God resides, and ere mid-day arrived 
In Eden; distance inexpressible 
By numbers that have name. But this I urge, 
Admitting motion in the Heavens, to show 
Invalid that which thee to doubt it moved; 
Not that I so affirm, though so it seem 
To thee who hast thy dwelling here on Earth. God, to remove his ways from human sense, 
Placed Heaven from Earth so far, that earthly sight, 
If it presume, might err in things too high, 
And no advantage gain. What if the sun 
Be center to the world; and other stars, 
By his attractive virtue and their own 
Incited, dance about him various rounds? Their wandering course now high, now low, then hid, 
Progressive, retrograde, or standing still, 
In six thou seest; and what if seventh to these 
The planet earth, so stedfast though she seem, 
Insensibly three different motions move? Which else to several spheres thou must ascribe, 
Moved contrary with thwart obliquities; 
Or save the sun his labour, and that swift 
Nocturnal and diurnal rhomb supposed, 
Invisible else above all stars, the wheel 
Of day and night; which needs not thy belief, 
If earth, industrious of herself, fetch day 
Travelling east, and with her part averse 
From the sun's beam meet night, her other part 
Still luminous by his ray. What if that light, 
Sent from her through the wide transpicuous air, 
To the terrestrial moon be as a star, 
Enlightening her by day, as she by night 
This earth? reciprocal, if land be there, 
Fields and inhabitants:  Her spots thou seest 
As clouds, and clouds may rain, and rain produce 
Fruits in her softened soil for some to eat 
Allotted there; and other suns perhaps, 
With their attendant moons, thou wilt descry, 
Communicating male and female light; 
Which two great sexes animate the world, 
Stored in each orb perhaps with some that live. For such vast room in Nature unpossessed 
By living soul, desart and desolate, 
Only to shine, yet scarce to contribute 
Each orb a glimpse of light, conveyed so far 
Down to this habitable, which returns 
Light back to them, is obvious to dispute. But whether thus these things, or whether not; 
But whether the sun, predominant in Heaven, 
Rise on the earth; or earth rise on the sun; 
He from the east his flaming road begin; 
Or she from west her silent course advance, 
With inoffensive pace that spinning sleeps 
On her soft axle, while she paces even, 
And bears thee soft with the smooth hair along; 
Sollicit not thy thoughts with matters hid; 
Leave them to God above; him serve, and fear! Of other creatures, as him pleases best, 
Wherever placed, let him dispose; joy thou 
In what he gives to thee, this Paradise 
And thy fair Eve; Heaven is for thee too high 
To know what passes there; be lowly wise: 
Think only what concerns thee, and thy being; 
Dream not of other worlds, what creatures there 
Live, in what state, condition, or degree; 
Contented that thus far hath been revealed 
Not of Earth only, but of highest Heaven. To whom thus Adam, cleared of doubt, replied. How fully hast thou satisfied me, pure 
Intelligence of Heaven, Angel serene! And, freed from intricacies, taught to live 
The easiest way; nor with perplexing thoughts 
To interrupt the sweet of life, from which 
God hath bid dwell far off all anxious cares, 
And not molest us; unless we ourselves 
Seek them with wandering thoughts, and notions vain. But apt the mind or fancy is to rove 
Unchecked, and of her roving is no end; 
Till warned, or by experience taught, she learn, 
That, not to know at large of things remote 
From use, obscure and subtle; but, to know 
That which before us lies in daily life, 
Is the prime wisdom:  What is more, is fume, 
Or emptiness, or fond impertinence: 
And renders us, in things that most concern, 
Unpractised, unprepared, and still to seek. Therefore from this high pitch let us descend 
A lower flight, and speak of things at hand 
Useful; whence, haply, mention may arise 
Of something not unseasonable to ask, 
By sufferance, and thy wonted favour, deigned. Thee I have heard relating what was done 
Ere my remembrance: now, hear me relate 
My story, which perhaps thou hast not heard; 
And day is not yet spent; till then thou seest 
How subtly to detain thee I devise; 
Inviting thee to hear while I relate; 
Fond! were it not in hope of thy reply: 
For, while I sit with thee, I seem in Heaven; 
And sweeter thy discourse is to my ear 
Than fruits of palm-tree pleasantest to thirst 
And hunger both, from labour, at the hour 
Of sweet repast; they satiate, and soon fill, 
Though pleasant; but thy words, with grace divine 
Imbued, bring to their sweetness no satiety. To whom thus Raphael answered heavenly meek. Nor are thy lips ungraceful, Sire of men, 
Nor tongue ineloquent; for God on thee 
Abundantly his gifts hath also poured 
Inward and outward both, his image fair: 
Speaking, or mute, all comeliness and grace 
Attends thee; and each word, each motion, forms; 
Nor less think we in Heaven of thee on Earth 
Than of our fellow-servant, and inquire 
Gladly into the ways of God with Man: 
For God, we see, hath honoured thee, and set 
On Man his equal love:  Say therefore on; 
For I that day was absent, as befel, 
Bound on a voyage uncouth and obscure, 
Far on excursion toward the gates of Hell; 
Squared in full legion (such command we had) 
To see that none thence issued forth a spy, 
Or enemy, while God was in his work; 
Lest he, incensed at such eruption bold, 
Destruction with creation might have mixed. Not that they durst without his leave attempt; 
But us he sends upon his high behests 
For state, as Sovran King; and to inure 
Our prompt obedience. Fast we found, fast shut, 
The dismal gates, and barricadoed strong; 
But long ere our approaching heard within 
Noise, other than the sound of dance or song, 
Torment, and loud lament, and furious rage. Glad we returned up to the coasts of light 
Ere sabbath-evening: so we had in charge. But thy relation now; for I attend, 
Pleased with thy words no less than thou with mine. So spake the Godlike Power, and thus our Sire. For Man to tell how human life began 
Is hard; for who himself beginning knew 
Desire with thee still longer to converse 
Induced me. As new waked from soundest sleep, 
Soft on the flowery herb I found me laid, 
In balmy sweat; which with his beams the sun 
Soon dried, and on the reeking moisture fed. Straight toward Heaven my wondering eyes I turned, 
And gazed a while the ample sky; till, raised 
By quick instinctive motion, up I sprung, 
As thitherward endeavouring, and upright 
Stood on my feet: about me round I saw 
Hill, dale, and shady woods, and sunny plains, 
And liquid lapse of murmuring streams; by these, 
Creatures that lived and moved, and walked, or flew; 
Birds on the branches warbling; all things smiled; 
With fragrance and with joy my heart o'erflowed. Myself I then perused, and limb by limb 
Surveyed, and sometimes went, and sometimes ran 
With supple joints, as lively vigour led: 
But who I was, or where, or from what cause, 
Knew not; to speak I tried, and forthwith spake; 
My tongue obeyed, and readily could name 
Whate'er I saw. Thou Sun, said I, fair light, 
And thou enlightened Earth, so fresh and gay, 
Ye Hills, and Dales, ye Rivers, Woods, and Plains, 
And ye that live and move, fair Creatures, tell, 
Tell, if ye saw, how I came thus, how here?-- 
Not of myself;--by some great Maker then, 
In goodness and in power pre-eminent: 
Tell me, how may I know him, how adore, 
From whom I have that thus I move and live, 
And feel that I am happier than I know.-- 
While thus I called, and strayed I knew not whither, 
From where I first drew air, and first beheld 
This happy light; when, answer none returned, 
On a green shady bank, profuse of flowers, 
Pensive I sat me down:  There gentle sleep 
First found me, and with soft oppression seised 
My droused sense, untroubled, though I thought 
I then was passing to my former state 
Insensible, and forthwith to dissolve: 
When suddenly stood at my head a dream, 
Whose inward apparition gently moved 
My fancy to believe I yet had being, 
And lived:  One came, methought, of shape divine, 
And said, 'Thy mansion wants thee, Adam; rise, 
'First Man, of men innumerable ordained 
'First Father! called by thee, I come thy guide 
'To the garden of bliss, thy seat prepared.' So saying, by the hand he took me raised, 
And over fields and waters, as in air 
Smooth-sliding without step, last led me up 
A woody mountain; whose high top was plain, 
A circuit wide, enclosed, with goodliest trees 
Planted, with walks, and bowers; that what I saw 
Of Earth before scarce pleasant seemed. Each tree, 
Loaden with fairest fruit that hung to the eye 
Tempting, stirred in me sudden appetite 
To pluck and eat; whereat I waked, and found 
Before mine eyes all real, as the dream 
Had lively shadowed:  Here had new begun 
My wandering, had not he, who was my guide 
Up hither, from among the trees appeared, 
Presence Divine. Rejoicing, but with awe, 
In adoration at his feet I fell 
Submiss:  He reared me, and 'Whom thou soughtest I am,' 
Said mildly, 'Author of all this thou seest 
'Above, or round about thee, or beneath. 'This Paradise I give thee, count it thine 
'To till and keep, and of the fruit to eat: 
'Of every tree that in the garden grows 
'Eat freely with glad heart; fear here no dearth: 
'But of the tree whose operation brings 
'Knowledge of good and ill, which I have set 
'The pledge of thy obedience and thy faith, 
'Amid the garden by the tree of life, 
'Remember what I warn thee, shun to taste, 
'And shun the bitter consequence: for know, 
'The day thou eatest thereof, my sole command 
'Transgressed, inevitably thou shalt die, 
'From that day mortal; and this happy state 
'Shalt lose, expelled from hence into a world 
'Of woe and sorrow.' Sternly he pronounced 
The rigid interdiction, which resounds 
Yet dreadful in mine ear, though in my choice 
Not to incur; but soon his clear aspect 
Returned, and gracious purpose thus renewed. 'Not only these fair bounds, but all the Earth 
'To thee and to thy race I give; as lords 
'Possess it, and all things that therein live, 
'Or live in sea, or air; beast, fish, and fowl. 'In sign whereof, each bird and beast behold 
'After their kinds; I bring them to receive 
'From thee their names, and pay thee fealty 
'With low subjection; understand the same 
'Of fish within their watery residence, 
'Not hither summoned, since they cannot change 
'Their element, to draw the thinner air.' As thus he spake, each bird and beast behold 
Approaching two and two; these cowering low 
With blandishment; each bird stooped on his wing. I named them, as they passed, and understood 
Their nature, with such knowledge God endued 
My sudden apprehension:  But in these 
I found not what methought I wanted still; 
And to the heavenly Vision thus presumed. O, by what name, for thou above all these, 
Above mankind, or aught than mankind higher, 
Surpassest far my naming; how may I 
Adore thee, Author of this universe, 
And all this good to man? for whose well being 
So amply, and with hands so liberal, 
Thou hast provided all things:  But with me 
I see not who partakes. In solitude 
What happiness, who can enjoy alone, 
Or, all enjoying, what contentment find? Thus I presumptuous; and the Vision bright, 
As with a smile more brightened, thus replied. What callest thou solitude? Is not the Earth 
With various living creatures, and the air 
Replenished, and all these at thy command 
To come and play before thee? Knowest thou not 
Their language and their ways? They also know, 
And reason not contemptibly:  With these 
Find pastime, and bear rule; thy realm is large. So spake the Universal Lord, and seemed 
So ordering:  I, with leave of speech implored, 
And humble deprecation, thus replied. Let not my words offend thee, Heavenly Power; 
My Maker, be propitious while I speak. Hast thou not made me here thy substitute, 
And these inferiour far beneath me set? Among unequals what society 
Can sort, what harmony, or true delight? Which must be mutual, in proportion due 
Given and received; but, in disparity 
The one intense, the other still remiss, 
Cannot well suit with either, but soon prove 
Tedious alike:  Of fellowship I speak 
Such as I seek, fit to participate 
All rational delight: wherein the brute 
Cannot be human consort:  They rejoice 
Each with their kind, lion with lioness; 
So fitly them in pairs thou hast combined: 
Much less can bird with beast, or fish with fowl 
So well converse, nor with the ox the ape; 
Worse then can man with beast, and least of all. Whereto the Almighty answered, not displeased. A nice and subtle happiness, I see, 
Thou to thyself proposest, in the choice 
Of thy associates, Adam! and wilt taste 
No pleasure, though in pleasure, solitary. What thinkest thou then of me, and this my state? Seem I to thee sufficiently possessed 
Of happiness, or not? who am alone 
From all eternity; for none I know 
Second to me or like, equal much less. How have I then with whom to hold converse, 
Save with the creatures which I made, and those 
To me inferiour, infinite descents 
Beneath what other creatures are to thee? He ceased; I lowly answered. To attain 
The highth and depth of thy eternal ways 
All human thoughts come short, Supreme of things! Thou in thyself art perfect, and in thee 
Is no deficience found:  Not so is Man, 
But in degree; the cause of his desire 
By conversation with his like to help 
Or solace his defects. No need that thou 
Shouldst propagate, already Infinite; 
And through all numbers absolute, though One: 
But Man by number is to manifest 
His single imperfection, and beget 
Like of his like, his image multiplied, 
In unity defective; which requires 
Collateral love, and dearest amity. Thou in thy secresy although alone, 
Best with thyself accompanied, seekest not 
Social communication; yet, so pleased, 
Canst raise thy creature to what highth thou wilt 
Of union or communion, deified: 
I, by conversing, cannot these erect 
From prone; nor in their ways complacence find. Thus I emboldened spake, and freedom used 
Permissive, and acceptance found; which gained 
This answer from the gracious Voice Divine. Thus far to try thee, Adam, I was pleased; 
And find thee knowing, not of beasts alone, 
Which thou hast rightly named, but of thyself; 
Expressing well the spirit within thee free, 
My image, not imparted to the brute; 
Whose fellowship therefore unmeet for thee 
Good reason was thou freely shouldst dislike; 
And be so minded still:  I, ere thou spakest, 
Knew it not good for Man to be alone; 
And no such company as then thou sawest 
Intended thee; for trial only brought, 
To see how thou couldest judge of fit and meet: 
What next I bring shall please thee, be assured, 
Thy likeness, thy fit help, thy other self, 
Thy wish exactly to thy heart's desire. He ended, or I heard no more; for now 
My earthly by his heavenly overpowered, 
Which it had long stood under, strained to the highth 
In that celestial colloquy sublime, 
As with an object that excels the sense 
Dazzled and spent, sunk down; and sought repair 
Of sleep, which instantly fell on me, called 
By Nature as in aid, and closed mine eyes. Mine eyes he closed, but open left the cell 
Of fancy, my internal sight; by which, 
Abstract as in a trance, methought I saw, 
Though sleeping, where I lay, and saw the shape 
Still glorious before whom awake I stood: 
Who stooping opened my left side, and took 
From thence a rib, with cordial spirits warm, 
And life-blood streaming fresh; wide was the wound, 
But suddenly with flesh filled up and healed: 
The rib he formed and fashioned with his hands; 
Under his forming hands a creature grew, 
Man-like, but different sex; so lovely fair, 
That what seemed fair in all the world, seemed now 
Mean, or in her summed up, in her contained 
And in her looks; which from that time infused 
Sweetness into my heart, unfelt before, 
And into all things from her air inspired 
The spirit of love and amorous delight. She disappeared, and left me dark; I waked 
To find her, or for ever to deplore 
Her loss, and other pleasures all abjure: 
When out of hope, behold her, not far off, 
Such as I saw her in my dream, adorned 
With what all Earth or Heaven could bestow 
To make her amiable:  On she came, 
Led by her heavenly Maker, though unseen, 
And guided by his voice; nor uninformed 
Of nuptial sanctity, and marriage rites: 
Grace was in all her steps, Heaven in her eye, 
In every gesture dignity and love. I, overjoyed, could not forbear aloud. This turn hath made amends; thou hast fulfilled 
Thy words, Creator bounteous and benign, 
Giver of all things fair! but fairest this 
Of all thy gifts! nor enviest. I now see 
Bone of my bone, flesh of my flesh, myself 
Before me:  Woman is her name;of Man 
Extracted: for this cause he shall forego 
Father and mother, and to his wife adhere; 
And they shall be one flesh, one heart, one soul. She heard me thus; and though divinely brought, 
Yet innocence, and virgin modesty, 
Her virtue, and the conscience of her worth, 
That would be wooed, and not unsought be won, 
Not obvious, not obtrusive, but, retired, 
The more desirable; or, to say all, 
Nature herself, though pure of sinful thought, 
Wrought in her so, that, seeing me, she turned: 
I followed her; she what was honour knew, 
And with obsequious majesty approved 
My pleaded reason. To the nuptial bower 
I led her blushing like the morn: All Heaven, 
And happy constellations, on that hour 
Shed their selectest influence; the Earth 
Gave sign of gratulation, and each hill; 
Joyous the birds; fresh gales and gentle airs 
Whispered it to the woods, and from their wings 
Flung rose, flung odours from the spicy shrub, 
Disporting, till the amorous bird of night 
Sung spousal, and bid haste the evening-star 
On his hill top, to light the bridal lamp. Thus have I told thee all my state, and brought 
My story to the sum of earthly bliss, 
Which I enjoy; and must confess to find 
In all things else delight indeed, but such 
As, used or not, works in the mind no change, 
Nor vehement desire; these delicacies 
I mean of taste, sight, smell, herbs, fruits, and flowers, 
Walks, and the melody of birds: but here 
Far otherwise, transported I behold, 
Transported touch; here passion first I felt, 
Commotion strange! in all enjoyments else 
Superiour and unmoved; here only weak 
Against the charm of Beauty's powerful glance. Or Nature failed in me, and left some part 
Not proof enough such object to sustain; 
Or, from my side subducting, took perhaps 
More than enough; at least on her bestowed 
Too much of ornament, in outward show 
Elaborate, of inward less exact. For well I understand in the prime end 
Of Nature her the inferiour, in the mind 
And inward faculties, which most excel; 
In outward also her resembling less 
His image who made both, and less expressing 
The character of that dominion given 
O'er other creatures:  Yet when I approach 
Her loveliness, so absolute she seems 
And in herself complete, so well to know 
Her own, that what she wills to do or say, 
Seems wisest, virtuousest, discreetest, best: 
All higher knowledge in her presence falls 
Degraded;  Wisdom in discourse with her 
Loses discountenanced, and like Folly shows; 
Authority and Reason on her wait, 
As one intended first, not after made 
Occasionally; and, to consummate all, 
Greatness of mind and Nobleness their seat 
Build in her loveliest, and create an awe 
About her, as a guard angelick placed. To whom the Angel with contracted brow. Accuse not Nature, she hath done her part; 
Do thou but thine; and be not diffident 
Of Wisdom; she deserts thee not, if thou 
Dismiss not her, when most thou needest her nigh, 
By attributing overmuch to things 
Less excellent, as thou thyself perceivest. For, what admirest thou, what transports thee so, 
An outside? fair, no doubt, and worthy well 
Thy cherishing, thy honouring, and thy love; 
Not thy subjection:  Weigh with her thyself; 
Then value:  Oft-times nothing profits more 
Than self-esteem, grounded on just and right 
Well managed; of that skill the more thou knowest, 
The more she will acknowledge thee her head, 
And to realities yield all her shows: 
Made so adorn for thy delight the more, 
So awful, that with honour thou mayest love 
Thy mate, who sees when thou art seen least wise. But if the sense of touch, whereby mankind 
Is propagated, seem such dear delight 
Beyond all other; think the same vouchsafed 
To cattle and each beast; which would not be 
To them made common and divulged, if aught 
Therein enjoyed were worthy to subdue 
The soul of man, or passion in him move. What higher in her society thou findest 
Attractive, human, rational, love still; 
In loving thou dost well, in passion not, 
Wherein true love consists not:  Love refines 
The thoughts, and heart enlarges; hath his seat 
In reason, and is judicious; is the scale 
By which to heavenly love thou mayest ascend, 
Not sunk in carnal pleasure; for which cause, 
Among the beasts no mate for thee was found. To whom thus, half abashed, Adam replied. Neither her outside formed so fair, nor aught 
In procreation common to all kinds, 
(Though higher of the genial bed by far, 
And with mysterious reverence I deem,) 
So much delights me, as those graceful acts, 
Those thousand decencies, that daily flow 
From all her words and actions mixed with love 
And sweet compliance, which declare unfeigned 
Union of mind, or in us both one soul; 
Harmony to behold in wedded pair 
More grateful than harmonious sound to the ear. Yet these subject not; I to thee disclose 
What inward thence I feel, not therefore foiled, 
Who meet with various objects, from the sense 
Variously representing; yet, still free, 
Approve the best, and follow what I approve. To love, thou blamest me not; for Love, thou sayest, 
Leads up to Heaven, is both the way and guide; 
Bear with me then, if lawful what I ask: 
Love not the heavenly Spirits, and how their love 
Express they? by looks only? or do they mix 
Irradiance, virtual or immediate touch? To whom the Angel, with a smile that glowed 
Celestial rosy red, Love's proper hue, 
Answered. Let it suffice thee that thou knowest 
Us happy, and without love no happiness. Whatever pure thou in the body enjoyest, 
(And pure thou wert created) we enjoy 
In eminence; and obstacle find none 
Of membrane, joint, or limb, exclusive bars; 
Easier than air with air, if Spirits embrace, 
Total they mix, union of pure with pure 
Desiring, nor restrained conveyance need, 
As flesh to mix with flesh, or soul with soul. But I can now no more; the parting sun 
Beyond the Earth's green Cape and verdant Isles 
Hesperian sets, my signal to depart. Be strong, live happy, and love! But, first of all, 
Him, whom to love is to obey, and keep 
His great command; take heed lest passion sway 
Thy judgement to do aught, which else free will 
Would not admit: thine, and of all thy sons, 
The weal or woe in thee is placed; beware! I in thy persevering shall rejoice, 
And all the Blest:  Stand fast;to stand or fall 
Free in thine own arbitrement it lies. Perfect within, no outward aid require; 
And all temptation to transgress repel. So saying, he arose; whom Adam thus 
Followed with benediction. Since to part, 
Go, heavenly guest, ethereal Messenger, 
Sent from whose sovran goodness I adore! Gentle to me and affable hath been 
Thy condescension, and shall be honoured ever 
With grateful memory:  Thou to mankind 
Be good and friendly still, and oft return! So parted they; the Angel up to Heaven 
From the thick shade, and Adam to his bower. Book IX                                                          
 
 
No more of talk where God or Angel guest 
With Man, as with his friend, familiar us'd, 
To sit indulgent, and with him partake 
Rural repast; permitting him the while 
Venial discourse unblam'd. I now must change 
Those notes to tragick; foul distrust, and breach 
Disloyal on the part of Man, revolt, 
And disobedience: on the part of Heaven 
Now alienated, distance and distaste, 
Anger and just rebuke, and judgement given, 
That brought into this world a world of woe, 
Sin and her shadow Death, and Misery 
Death's harbinger: Sad talk!yet argument 
Not less but more heroick than the wrath 
Of stern Achilles on his foe pursued 
Thrice fugitive about Troy wall; or rage 
Of Turnus for Lavinia disespous'd; 
Or Neptune's ire, or Juno's, that so long 
Perplexed the Greek, and Cytherea's son:                         
 
   00482129  
If answerable style I can obtain 
Of my celestial patroness, who deigns 
Her nightly visitation unimplor'd, 
And dictates to me slumbering; or inspires 
Easy my unpremeditated verse: 
Since first this subject for heroick song 
Pleas'd me long choosing, and beginning late; 
Not sedulous by nature to indite 
Wars, hitherto the only argument 
Heroick deem'd chief mastery to dissect 
With long and tedious havock fabled knights 
In battles feign'd; the better fortitude 
Of patience and heroick martyrdom 
Unsung; or to describe races and games, 
Or tilting furniture, imblazon'd shields, 
Impresses quaint, caparisons and steeds, 
Bases and tinsel trappings, gorgeous knights 
At joust and tournament; then marshall'd feast 
Serv'd up in hall with sewers and seneshals; 
The skill of artifice or office mean, 
Not that which justly gives heroick name 
To person, or to poem. Me, of these 
Nor skill'd nor studious, higher argument 
Remains; sufficient of itself to raise 
That name, unless an age too late, or cold 
Climate, or years, damp my intended wing 
Depress'd; and much they may, if all be mine, 
Not hers, who brings it nightly to my ear. The sun was sunk, and after him the star 
Of Hesperus, whose office is to bring 
Twilight upon the earth, short arbiter 
"twixt day and night, and now from end to end 
Night's hemisphere had veil'd the horizon round: 
When satan, who late fled before the threats 
Of Gabriel out of Eden, now improv'd 
In meditated fraud and malice, bent 
On Man's destruction, maugre what might hap 
Of heavier on himself, fearless returned 
From compassing the earth; cautious of day, 
Since Uriel, regent of the sun, descried 
His entrance, and foreworned the Cherubim 
That kept their watch; thence full of anguish driven, 
The space of seven continued nights he rode 
With darkness; thrice the equinoctial line 
He circled; four times crossed the car of night 
From pole to pole, traversing each colure; 
On the eighth returned; and, on the coast averse 
From entrance or Cherubick watch, by stealth 
Found unsuspected way. There was a place, 
Now not, though sin, not time, first wrought the change, 
Where Tigris, at the foot of Paradise, 
Into a gulf shot under ground, till part 
Rose up a fountain by the tree of life: 
In with the river sunk, and with it rose 
Satan, involved in rising mist; then sought 
Where to lie hid; sea he had searched, and land, 
From Eden over Pontus and the pool 
Maeotis, up beyond the river Ob; 
Downward as far antarctick; and in length, 
West from Orontes to the ocean barred 
At Darien ; thence to the land where flows 
Ganges and Indus: Thus the orb he roamed 
With narrow search; and with inspection deep 
Considered every creature, which of all 
Most opportune might serve his wiles; and found 
The Serpent subtlest beast of all the field. Him after long debate, irresolute 
Of thoughts revolved, his final sentence chose 
Fit vessel, fittest imp of fraud, in whom 
To enter, and his dark suggestions hide 
From sharpest sight: for, in the wily snake 
Whatever sleights, none would suspicious mark, 
As from his wit and native subtlety 
Proceeding; which, in other beasts observed, 
Doubt might beget of diabolick power 
Active within, beyond the sense of brute. Thus he resolved, but first from inward grief 
His bursting passion into plaints thus poured. More justly, seat worthier of Gods, as built 
With second thoughts, reforming what was old! O Earth, how like to Heaven, if not preferred 
For what God, after better, worse would build? Terrestrial Heaven, danced round by other Heavens 
That shine, yet bear their bright officious lamps, 
Light above light, for thee alone, as seems, 
In thee concentring all their precious beams 
Of sacred influence! As God in Heaven 
Is center, yet extends to all; so thou, 
Centring, receivest from all those orbs: in thee, 
Not in themselves, all their known virtue appears 
Productive in herb, plant, and nobler birth 
Of creatures animate with gradual life 
Of growth, sense, reason, all summed up in Man. With what delight could I have walked thee round, 
If I could joy in aught, sweet interchange 
Of hill, and valley, rivers, woods, and plains, 
Now land, now sea and shores with forest crowned, 
Rocks, dens, and caves! But I in none of these 
Find place or refuge; and the more I see 
Pleasures about me, so much more I feel 
Torment within me, as from the hateful siege 
Of contraries: all good to me becomes 
Bane, and in Heaven much worse would be my state. But neither here seek I, no nor in Heaven 
To dwell, unless by mastering Heaven's Supreme; 
Nor hope to be myself less miserable 
By what I seek, but others to make such 
As I, though thereby worse to me redound: 
For only in destroying I find ease 
To my relentless thoughts; and, him destroyed, 
Or won to what may work his utter loss, 
For whom all this was made, all this will soon 
Follow, as to him linked in weal or woe; 
In woe then; that destruction wide may range: 
To me shall be the glory sole among 
The infernal Powers, in one day to have marred 
What he, Almighty styled, six nights and days 
Continued making; and who knows how long 
Before had been contriving? though perhaps 
Not longer than since I, in one night, freed 
From servitude inglorious well nigh half 
The angelick name, and thinner left the throng 
Of his adorers: He, to be avenged, 
And to repair his numbers thus impaired, 
Whether such virtue spent of old now failed 
More Angels to create, if they at least 
Are his created, or, to spite us more, 
Determined to advance into our room 
A creature formed of earth, and him endow, 
Exalted from so base original, 
With heavenly spoils, our spoils: What he decreed, 
He effected; Man he made, and for him built 
Magnificent this world, and earth his seat, 
Him lord pronounced; and, O indignity! Subjected to his service angel-wings, 
And flaming ministers to watch and tend 
Their earthly charge: Of these the vigilance 
I dread; and, to elude, thus wrapt in mist 
Of midnight vapour glide obscure, and pry 
In every bush and brake, where hap may find 
The serpent sleeping; in whose mazy folds 
To hide me, and the dark intent I bring. O foul descent! that I, who erst contended 
With Gods to sit the highest, am now constrained 
Into a beast; and, mixed with bestial slime, 
This essence to incarnate and imbrute, 
That to the highth of Deity aspired! But what will not ambition and revenge 
Descend to? Who aspires, must down as low 
As high he soared; obnoxious, first or last, 
To basest things. Revenge, at first though sweet, 
Bitter ere long, back on itself recoils: 
Let it; I reck not, so it light well aimed, 
Since higher I fall short, on him who next 
Provokes my envy, this new favourite 
Of Heaven, this man of clay, son of despite, 
Whom, us the more to spite, his Maker raised 
From dust: Spite then with spite is best repaid. So saying, through each thicket dank or dry, 
Like a black mist low-creeping, he held on 
His midnight-search, where soonest he might find 
The serpent; him fast-sleeping soon he found 
In labyrinth of many a round self-rolled, 
His head the midst, well stored with subtile wiles: 
Not yet in horrid shade or dismal den, 
Nor nocent yet; but, on the grassy herb, 
Fearless unfeared he slept: in at his mouth 
The Devil entered; and his brutal sense, 
In heart or head, possessing, soon inspired 
With act intelligential; but his sleep 
Disturbed not, waiting close the approach of morn. Now, when as sacred light began to dawn 
In Eden on the humid flowers, that breathed 
Their morning incense, when all things, that breathe, 
From the Earth's great altar send up silent praise 
To the Creator, and his nostrils fill 
With grateful smell, forth came the human pair, 
And joined their vocal worship to the quire 
Of creatures wanting voice; that done, partake 
The season prime for sweetest scents and airs: 
Then commune, how that day they best may ply 
Their growing work: for much their work out-grew 
The hands' dispatch of two gardening so wide, 
And Eve first to her husband thus began. Adam, well may we labour still to dress 
This garden, still to tend plant, herb, and flower, 
Our pleasant task enjoined; but, till more hands 
Aid us, the work under our labour grows, 
Luxurious by restraint; what we by day 
Lop overgrown, or prune, or prop, or bind, 
One night or two with wanton growth derides 
Tending to wild. Thou therefore now advise, 
Or bear what to my mind first thoughts present: 
Let us divide our labours; thou, where choice 
Leads thee, or where most needs, whether to wind 
The woodbine round this arbour, or direct 
The clasping ivy where to climb; while I, 
In yonder spring of roses intermixed 
With myrtle, find what to redress till noon: 
For, while so near each other thus all day 
Our task we choose, what wonder if so near 
Looks intervene and smiles, or object new 
Casual discourse draw on; which intermits 
Our day's work, brought to little, though begun 
Early, and the hour of supper comes unearned? To whom mild answer Adam thus returned. Sole Eve, associate sole, to me beyond 
Compare above all living creatures dear! Well hast thou motioned, well thy thoughts employed, 
How we might best fulfil the work which here 
God hath assigned us; nor of me shalt pass 
Unpraised: for nothing lovelier can be found 
In woman, than to study houshold good, 
And good works in her husband to promote. Yet not so strictly hath our Lord imposed 
Labour, as to debar us when we need 
Refreshment, whether food, or talk between, 
Food of the mind, or this sweet intercourse 
Of looks and smiles; for smiles from reason flow, 
To brute denied, and are of love the food; 
Love, not the lowest end of human life. For not to irksome toil, but to delight, 
He made us, and delight to reason joined. These paths and bowers doubt not but our joint hands 
Will keep from wilderness with ease, as wide 
As we need walk, till younger hands ere long 
Assist us; But, if much converse perhaps 
Thee satiate, to short absence I could yield: 
For solitude sometimes is best society, 
And short retirement urges sweet return. But other doubt possesses me, lest harm 
Befall thee severed from me; for thou knowest 
What hath been warned us, what malicious foe 
Envying our happiness, and of his own 
Despairing, seeks to work us woe and shame 
By sly assault; and somewhere nigh at hand 
Watches, no doubt, with greedy hope to find 
His wish and best advantage, us asunder; 
Hopeless to circumvent us joined, where each 
To other speedy aid might lend at need: 
Whether his first design be to withdraw 
Our fealty from God, or to disturb 
Conjugal love, than which perhaps no bliss 
Enjoyed by us excites his envy more; 
Or this, or worse, leave not the faithful side 
That gave thee being, still shades thee, and protects. The wife, where danger or dishonour lurks, 
Safest and seemliest by her husband stays, 
Who guards her, or with her the worst endures. To whom the virgin majesty of Eve, 
As one who loves, and some unkindness meets, 
With sweet austere composure thus replied. Offspring of Heaven and Earth, and all Earth's Lord! That such an enemy we have, who seeks 
Our ruin, both by thee informed I learn, 
And from the parting Angel over-heard, 
As in a shady nook I stood behind, 
Just then returned at shut of evening flowers. But, that thou shouldst my firmness therefore doubt 
To God or thee, because we have a foe 
May tempt it, I expected not to hear. His violence thou fearest not, being such 
As we, not capable of death or pain, 
Can either not receive, or can repel. His fraud is then thy fear; which plain infers 
Thy equal fear, that my firm faith and love 
Can by his fraud be shaken or seduced; 
Thoughts, which how found they harbour in thy breast, 
Adam, mis-thought of her to thee so dear? To whom with healing words Adam replied. Daughter of God and Man, immortal Eve! For such thou art; from sin and blame entire: 
Not diffident of thee do I dissuade 
Thy absence from my sight, but to avoid 
The attempt itself, intended by our foe. For he who tempts, though in vain, at least asperses 
The tempted with dishonour foul; supposed 
Not incorruptible of faith, not proof 
Against temptation: Thou thyself with scorn 
And anger wouldst resent the offered wrong, 
Though ineffectual found: misdeem not then, 
If such affront I labour to avert 
From thee alone, which on us both at once 
The enemy, though bold, will hardly dare; 
Or daring, first on me the assault shall light. Nor thou his malice and false guile contemn; 
Subtle he needs must be, who could seduce 
Angels; nor think superfluous other's aid. I, from the influence of thy looks, receive 
Access in every virtue; in thy sight 
More wise, more watchful, stronger, if need were 
Of outward strength; while shame, thou looking on, 
Shame to be overcome or over-reached, 
Would utmost vigour raise, and raised unite. Why shouldst not thou like sense within thee feel 
When I am present, and thy trial choose 
With me, best witness of thy virtue tried? So spake domestick Adam in his care 
And matrimonial love; but Eve, who thought 
Less attributed to her faith sincere, 
Thus her reply with accent sweet renewed. If this be our condition, thus to dwell 
In narrow circuit straitened by a foe, 
Subtle or violent, we not endued 
Single with like defence, wherever met; 
How are we happy, still in fear of harm? But harm precedes not sin: only our foe, 
Tempting, affronts us with his foul esteem 
Of our integrity: his foul esteem 
Sticks no dishonour on our front, but turns 
Foul on himself; then wherefore shunned or feared 
By us? who rather double honour gain 
From his surmise proved false; find peace within, 
Favour from Heaven, our witness, from the event. And what is faith, love, virtue, unassayed 
Alone, without exteriour help sustained? Let us not then suspect our happy state 
Left so imperfect by the Maker wise, 
As not secure to single or combined. Frail is our happiness, if this be so, 
And Eden were no Eden, thus exposed. To whom thus Adam fervently replied. O Woman, best are all things as the will 
Of God ordained them: His creating hand 
Nothing imperfect or deficient left 
Of all that he created, much less Man, 
Or aught that might his happy state secure, 
Secure from outward force; within himself 
The danger lies, yet lies within his power: 
Against his will he can receive no harm. But God left free the will; for what obeys 
Reason, is free; and Reason he made right, 
But bid her well be ware, and still erect; 
Lest, by some fair-appearing good surprised, 
She dictate false; and mis-inform the will 
To do what God expressly hath forbid. Not then mistrust, but tender love, enjoins, 
That I should mind thee oft; and mind thou me. Firm we subsist, yet possible to swerve; 
Since Reason not impossibly may meet 
Some specious object by the foe suborned, 
And fall into deception unaware, 
Not keeping strictest watch, as she was warned. Seek not temptation then, which to avoid 
Were better, and most likely if from me 
Thou sever not: Trial will come unsought. Wouldst thou approve thy constancy, approve 
First thy obedience; the other who can know, 
Not seeing thee attempted, who attest? But, if thou think, trial unsought may find 
Us both securer than thus warned thou seemest, 
Go; for thy stay, not free, absents thee more; 
Go in thy native innocence, rely 
On what thou hast of virtue; summon all! For God towards thee hath done his part, do thine. So spake the patriarch of mankind; but Eve 
Persisted; yet submiss, though last, replied. With thy permission then, and thus forewarned 
Chiefly by what thy own last reasoning words 
Touched only; that our trial, when least sought, 
May find us both perhaps far less prepared, 
The willinger I go, nor much expect 
A foe so proud will first the weaker seek; 
So bent, the more shall shame him his repulse. Thus saying, from her husband's hand her hand 
Soft she withdrew; and, like a Wood-Nymph light, 
Oread or Dryad, or of Delia's train, 
Betook her to the groves; but Delia's self 
In gait surpassed, and Goddess-like deport, 
Though not as she with bow and quiver armed, 
But with such gardening tools as Art yet rude, 
Guiltless of fire, had formed, or Angels brought. To Pales, or Pomona, thus adorned, 
Likest she seemed, Pomona when she fled 
Vertumnus, or to Ceres in her prime, 
Yet virgin of Proserpina from Jove. Her long with ardent look his eye pursued 
Delighted, but desiring more her stay. Oft he to her his charge of quick return 
Repeated; she to him as oft engaged 
To be returned by noon amid the bower, 
And all things in best order to invite 
Noontide repast, or afternoon's repose. O much deceived, much failing, hapless Eve, 
Of thy presumed return! event perverse! Thou never from that hour in Paradise 
Foundst either sweet repast, or sound repose; 
Such ambush, hid among sweet flowers and shades, 
Waited with hellish rancour imminent 
To intercept thy way, or send thee back 
Despoiled of innocence, of faith, of bliss! For now, and since first break of dawn, the Fiend, 
Mere serpent in appearance, forth was come; 
And on his quest, where likeliest he might find 
The only two of mankind, but in them 
The whole included race, his purposed prey. In bower and field he sought, where any tuft 
Of grove or garden-plot more pleasant lay, 
Their tendance, or plantation for delight; 
By fountain or by shady rivulet 
He sought them both, but wished his hap might find 
Eve separate; he wished, but not with hope 
Of what so seldom chanced; when to his wish, 
Beyond his hope, Eve separate he spies, 
Veiled in a cloud of fragrance, where she stood, 
Half spied, so thick the roses blushing round 
About her glowed, oft stooping to support 
Each flower of slender stalk, whose head, though gay 
Carnation, purple, azure, or specked with gold, 
Hung drooping unsustained; them she upstays 
Gently with myrtle band, mindless the while 
Herself, though fairest unsupported flower, 
From her best prop so far, and storm so nigh. Nearer he drew, and many a walk traversed 
Of stateliest covert, cedar, pine, or palm; 
Then voluble and bold, now hid, now seen, 
Among thick-woven arborets, and flowers 
Imbordered on each bank, the hand of Eve: 
Spot more delicious than those gardens feigned 
Or of revived Adonis, or renowned 
Alcinous, host of old Laertes' son; 
Or that, not mystick, where the sapient king 
Held dalliance with his fair Egyptian spouse. Much he the place admired, the person more. As one who long in populous city pent, 
Where houses thick and sewers annoy the air, 
Forth issuing on a summer's morn, to breathe 
Among the pleasant villages and farms 
Adjoined, from each thing met conceives delight; 
The smell of grain, or tedded grass, or kine, 
Or dairy, each rural sight, each rural sound; 
If chance, with nymph-like step, fair virgin pass, 
What pleasing seemed, for her now pleases more; 
She most, and in her look sums all delight: 
Such pleasure took the Serpent to behold 
This flowery plat, the sweet recess of Eve 
Thus early, thus alone: Her heavenly form 
Angelick, but more soft, and feminine, 
Her graceful innocence, her every air 
Of gesture, or least action, overawed 
His malice, and with rapine sweet bereaved 
His fierceness of the fierce intent it brought: 
That space the Evil-one abstracted stood 
From his own evil, and for the time remained 
Stupidly good; of enmity disarmed, 
Of guile, of hate, of envy, of revenge: 
But the hot Hell that always in him burns, 
Though in mid Heaven, soon ended his delight, 
And tortures him now more, the more he sees 
Of pleasure, not for him ordained: then soon 
Fierce hate he recollects, and all his thoughts 
Of mischief, gratulating, thus excites. Thoughts, whither have ye led me! with what sweet 
Compulsion thus transported, to forget 
What hither brought us! hate, not love;nor hope 
Of Paradise for Hell, hope here to taste 
Of pleasure; but all pleasure to destroy, 
Save what is in destroying; other joy 
To me is lost. Then, let me not let pass 
Occasion which now smiles; behold alone 
The woman, opportune to all attempts, 
Her husband, for I view far round, not nigh, 
Whose higher intellectual more I shun, 
And strength, of courage haughty, and of limb 
Heroick built, though of terrestrial mould; 
Foe not informidable! exempt from wound, 
I not; so much hath Hell debased, and pain 
Enfeebled me, to what I was in Heaven. She fair, divinely fair, fit love for Gods! Not terrible, though terrour be in love 
And beauty, not approached by stronger hate, 
Hate stronger, under show of love well feigned; 
The way which to her ruin now I tend. So spake the enemy of mankind, enclosed 
In serpent, inmate bad! and toward Eve 
Addressed his way: not with indented wave, 
Prone on the ground, as since; but on his rear, 
Circular base of rising folds, that towered 
Fold above fold, a surging maze! his head 
Crested aloft, and carbuncle his eyes; 
With burnished neck of verdant gold, erect 
Amidst his circling spires, that on the grass 
Floated redundant: pleasing was his shape 
And lovely; never since of serpent-kind 
Lovelier, not those that in Illyria changed, 
Hermione and Cadmus, or the god 
In Epidaurus; nor to which transformed 
Ammonian Jove, or Capitoline, was seen; 
He with Olympias; this with her who bore 
Scipio, the highth of Rome. With tract oblique 
At first, as one who sought access, but feared 
To interrupt, side-long he works his way. As when a ship, by skilful steersmen wrought 
Nigh river's mouth or foreland, where the wind 
Veers oft, as oft so steers, and shifts her sail: 
So varied he, and of his tortuous train 
Curled many a wanton wreath in sight of Eve, 
To lure her eye; she, busied, heard the sound 
Of rusling leaves, but minded not, as used 
To such disport before her through the field, 
From every beast; more duteous at her call, 
Than at Circean call the herd disguised. He, bolder now, uncalled before her stood, 
But as in gaze admiring: oft he bowed 
His turret crest, and sleek enamelled neck, 
Fawning; and licked the ground whereon she trod. His gentle dumb expression turned at length 
The eye of Eve to mark his play; he, glad 
Of her attention gained, with serpent-tongue 
Organick, or impulse of vocal air, 
His fraudulent temptation thus began. Wonder not, sovran Mistress, if perhaps 
Thou canst, who art sole wonder! much less arm 
Thy looks, the Heaven of mildness, with disdain, 
Displeased that I approach thee thus, and gaze 
Insatiate; I thus single;nor have feared 
Thy awful brow, more awful thus retired. Fairest resemblance of thy Maker fair, 
Thee all things living gaze on, all things thine 
By gift, and thy celestial beauty adore 
With ravishment beheld! there best beheld, 
Where universally admired; but here 
In this enclosure wild, these beasts among, 
Beholders rude, and shallow to discern 
Half what in thee is fair, one man except, 
Who sees thee? and what is one? who should be seen 
A Goddess among Gods, adored and served 
By Angels numberless, thy daily train. So glozed the Tempter, and his proem tuned: 
Into the heart of Eve his words made way, 
Though at the voice much marvelling; at length, 
Not unamazed, she thus in answer spake. What may this mean? language of man pronounced 
By tongue of brute, and human sense expressed? The first, at least, of these I thought denied 
To beasts; whom God, on their creation-day, 
Created mute to all articulate sound: 
The latter I demur; for in their looks 
Much reason, and in their actions, oft appears. Thee, Serpent, subtlest beast of all the field 
I knew, but not with human voice endued; 
Redouble then this miracle, and say, 
How camest thou speakable of mute, and how 
To me so friendly grown above the rest 
Of brutal kind, that daily are in sight? Say, for such wonder claims attention due. To whom the guileful Tempter thus replied. Empress of this fair world, resplendent Eve! Easy to me it is to tell thee all 
What thou commandest; and right thou shouldst be obeyed: 
I was at first as other beasts that graze 
The trodden herb, of abject thoughts and low, 
As was my food; nor aught but food discerned 
Or sex, and apprehended nothing high: 
Till, on a day roving the field, I chanced 
A goodly tree far distant to behold 
Loaden with fruit of fairest colours mixed, 
Ruddy and gold: I nearer drew to gaze; 
When from the boughs a savoury odour blown, 
Grateful to appetite, more pleased my sense 
Than smell of sweetest fennel, or the teats 
Of ewe or goat dropping with milk at even, 
Unsucked of lamb or kid, that tend their play. To satisfy the sharp desire I had 
Of tasting those fair apples, I resolved 
Not to defer; hunger and thirst at once, 
Powerful persuaders, quickened at the scent 
Of that alluring fruit, urged me so keen. About the mossy trunk I wound me soon; 
For, high from ground, the branches would require 
Thy utmost reach or Adam's: Round the tree 
All other beasts that saw, with like desire 
Longing and envying stood, but could not reach. Amid the tree now got, where plenty hung 
Tempting so nigh, to pluck and eat my fill 
I spared not; for, such pleasure till that hour, 
At feed or fountain, never had I found. Sated at length, ere long I might perceive 
Strange alteration in me, to degree 
Of reason in my inward powers; and speech 
Wanted not long; though to this shape retained. Thenceforth to speculations high or deep 
I turned my thoughts, and with capacious mind 
Considered all things visible in Heaven, 
Or Earth, or Middle; all things fair and good: 
But all that fair and good in thy divine 
Semblance, and in thy beauty's heavenly ray, 
United I beheld; no fair to thine 
Equivalent or second! which compelled 
Me thus, though importune perhaps, to come 
And gaze, and worship thee of right declared 
Sovran of creatures, universal Dame! So talked the spirited sly Snake; and Eve, 
Yet more amazed, unwary thus replied. Serpent, thy overpraising leaves in doubt 
The virtue of that fruit, in thee first proved: 
But say, where grows the tree? from hence how far? For many are the trees of God that grow 
In Paradise, and various, yet unknown 
To us; in such abundance lies our choice, 
As leaves a greater store of fruit untouched, 
Still hanging incorruptible, till men 
Grow up to their provision, and more hands 
Help to disburden Nature of her birth. To whom the wily Adder, blithe and glad. Empress, the way is ready, and not long; 
Beyond a row of myrtles, on a flat, 
Fast by a fountain, one small thicket past 
Of blowing myrrh and balm: if thou accept 
My conduct, I can bring thee thither soon 
Lead then, said Eve. He, leading, swiftly rolled 
In tangles, and made intricate seem straight, 
To mischief swift. Hope elevates, and joy 
Brightens his crest; as when a wandering fire, 
Compact of unctuous vapour, which the night 
Condenses, and the cold environs round, 
Kindled through agitation to a flame, 
Which oft, they say, some evil Spirit attends, 
Hovering and blazing with delusive light, 
Misleads the amazed night-wanderer from his way 
To bogs and mires, and oft through pond or pool; 
There swallowed up and lost, from succour far. So glistered the dire Snake, and into fraud 
Led Eve, our credulous mother, to the tree 
Of prohibition, root of all our woe; 
Which when she saw, thus to her guide she spake. Serpent, we might have spared our coming hither, 
Fruitless to me, though fruit be here to excess, 
The credit of whose virtue rest with thee; 
Wonderous indeed, if cause of such effects. But of this tree we may not taste nor touch; 
God so commanded, and left that command 
Sole daughter of his voice; the rest, we live 
Law to ourselves; our reason is our law. To whom the Tempter guilefully replied. Indeed! hath God then said that of the fruit 
Of all these garden-trees ye shall not eat, 
Yet Lords declared of all in earth or air$? To whom thus Eve, yet sinless. Of the fruit 
Of each tree in the garden we may eat; 
But of the fruit of this fair tree amidst 
The garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat 
Thereof, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die. She scarce had said, though brief, when now more bold 
The Tempter, but with show of zeal and love 
To Man, and indignation at his wrong, 
New part puts on; and, as to passion moved, 
Fluctuates disturbed, yet comely and in act 
Raised, as of some great matter to begin. As when of old some orator renowned, 
In Athens or free Rome, where eloquence 
Flourished, since mute! to some great cause addressed, 
Stood in himself collected; while each part, 
Motion, each act, won audience ere the tongue; 
Sometimes in highth began, as no delay 
Of preface brooking, through his zeal of right: 
So standing, moving, or to highth up grown, 
The Tempter, all impassioned, thus began. O sacred, wise, and wisdom-giving Plant, 
Mother of science! now I feel thy power 
Within me clear; not only to discern 
Things in their causes, but to trace the ways 
Of highest agents, deemed however wise. Queen of this universe! do not believe 
Those rigid threats of death: ye shall not die: 
How should you? by the fruit? it gives you life 
To knowledge; by the threatener? look on me, 
Me, who have touched and tasted; yet both live, 
And life more perfect have attained than Fate 
Meant me, by venturing higher than my lot. Shall that be shut to Man, which to the Beast 
Is open? or will God incense his ire 
For such a petty trespass? and not praise 
Rather your dauntless virtue, whom the pain 
Of death denounced, whatever thing death be, 
Deterred not from achieving what might lead 
To happier life, knowledge of good and evil; 
Of good, how just? of evil, if what is evil 
Be real, why not known, since easier shunned? God therefore cannot hurt ye, and be just; 
Not just, not God; not feared then, nor obeyed: 
Your fear itself of death removes the fear. Why then was this forbid? Why, but to awe; 
Why, but to keep ye low and ignorant, 
His worshippers? He knows that in the day 
Ye eat thereof, your eyes that seem so clear, 
Yet are but dim, shall perfectly be then 
Opened and cleared, and ye shall be as Gods, 
Knowing both good and evil, as they know. That ye shall be as Gods, since I as Man, 
Internal Man, is but proportion meet; 
I, of brute, human; ye, of human, Gods. So ye shall die perhaps, by putting off 
Human, to put on Gods; death to be wished, 
Though threatened, which no worse than this can bring. And what are Gods, that Man may not become 
As they, participating God-like food? The Gods are first, and that advantage use 
On our belief, that all from them proceeds: 
I question it; for this fair earth I see, 
Warmed by the sun, producing every kind; 
Them, nothing: if they all things, who enclosed 
Knowledge of good and evil in this tree, 
That whoso eats thereof, forthwith attains 
Wisdom without their leave? and wherein lies 
The offence, that Man should thus attain to know? What can your knowledge hurt him, or this tree 
Impart against his will, if all be his? Or is it envy? and can envy dwell 
In heavenly breasts? These, these, and many more 
Causes import your need of this fair fruit. Goddess humane, reach then, and freely taste! He ended; and his words, replete with guile, 
Into her heart too easy entrance won: 
Fixed on the fruit she gazed, which to behold 
Might tempt alone; and in her ears the sound 
Yet rung of his persuasive words, impregned 
With reason, to her seeming, and with truth: 
Mean while the hour of noon drew on, and waked 
An eager appetite, raised by the smell 
So savoury of that fruit, which with desire, 
Inclinable now grown to touch or taste, 
Solicited her longing eye; yet first 
Pausing a while, thus to herself she mused. Great are thy virtues, doubtless, best of fruits, 
Though kept from man, and worthy to be admired; 
Whose taste, too long forborn, at first assay 
Gave elocution to the mute, and taught 
The tongue not made for speech to speak thy praise: 
Thy praise he also, who forbids thy use, 
Conceals not from us, naming thee the tree 
Of knowledge, knowledge both of good and evil; 
Forbids us then to taste! but his forbidding 
Commends thee more, while it infers the good 
By thee communicated, and our want: 
For good unknown sure is not had; or, had 
And yet unknown, is as not had at all. In plain then, what forbids he but to know, 
Forbids us good, forbids us to be wise? Such prohibitions bind not. But, if death 
Bind us with after-bands, what profits then 
Our inward freedom? In the day we eat 
Of this fair fruit, our doom is, we shall die! How dies the Serpent? he hath eaten and lives, 
And knows, and speaks, and reasons, and discerns, 
Irrational till then. For us alone 
Was death invented? or to us denied 
This intellectual food, for beasts reserved? For beasts it seems: yet that one beast which first 
Hath tasted envies not, but brings with joy 
The good befallen him, author unsuspect, 
Friendly to man, far from deceit or guile. What fear I then? rather, what know to fear 
Under this ignorance of good and evil, 
Of God or death, of law or penalty? Here grows the cure of all, this fruit divine, 
Fair to the eye, inviting to the taste, 
Of virtue to make wise:  What hinders then 
To reach, and feed at once both body and mind? So saying, her rash hand in evil hour 
Forth reaching to the fruit, she plucked, she eat! Earth felt the wound; and Nature from her seat, 
Sighing through all her works, gave signs of woe, 
That all was lost. Back to the thicket slunk 
The guilty Serpent; and well might;for Eve, 
Intent now wholly on her taste, nought else 
Regarded; such delight till then, as seemed, 
In fruit she never tasted, whether true 
Or fancied so, through expectation high 
Of knowledge; not was Godhead from her thought. Greedily she ingorged without restraint, 
And knew not eating death:  Satiate at length, 
And hightened as with wine, jocund and boon, 
Thus to herself she pleasingly began. O sovran, virtuous, precious of all trees 
In Paradise! of operation blest 
To sapience, hitherto obscured, infamed. And thy fair fruit let hang, as to no end 
Created; but henceforth my early care, 
Not without song, each morning, and due praise, 
Shall tend thee, and the fertile burden ease 
Of thy full branches offered free to all; 
Till, dieted by thee, I grow mature 
In knowledge, as the Gods, who all things know; 
Though others envy what they cannot give: 
For, had the gift been theirs, it had not here 
Thus grown. Experience, next, to thee I owe, 
Best guide; not following thee, I had remained 
In ignorance; thou openest wisdom's way, 
And givest access, though secret she retire. And I perhaps am secret: Heaven is high, 
High, and remote to see from thence distinct 
Each thing on Earth; and other care perhaps 
May have diverted from continual watch 
Our great Forbidder, safe with all his spies 
About him. But to Adam in what sort 
Shall I appear? shall I to him make known 
As yet my change, and give him to partake 
Full happiness with me, or rather not, 
But keeps the odds of knowledge in my power 
Without copartner? so to add what wants 
In female sex, the more to draw his love, 
And render me more equal; and perhaps, 
A thing not undesirable, sometime 
Superiour; for, inferiour, who is free 
This may be well:  But what if God have seen, 
And death ensue? then I shall be no more! And Adam, wedded to another Eve, 
Shall live with her enjoying, I extinct; 
A death to think! Confirmed then I resolve, 
Adam shall share with me in bliss or woe: 
So dear I love him, that with him all deaths 
I could endure, without him live no life. So saying, from the tree her step she turned; 
But first low reverence done, as to the Power 
That dwelt within, whose presence had infused 
Into the plant sciential sap, derived 
From nectar, drink of Gods. Adam the while, 
Waiting desirous her return, had wove 
Of choicest flowers a garland, to adorn 
Her tresses, and her rural labours crown; 
As reapers oft are wont their harvest-queen. Great joy he promised to his thoughts, and new 
Solace in her return, so long delayed: 
Yet oft his heart, divine of something ill, 
Misgave him; he the faltering measure felt; 
And forth to meet her went, the way she took 
That morn when first they parted: by the tree 
Of knowledge he must pass; there he her met, 
Scarce from the tree returning; in her hand 
A bough of fairest fruit, that downy smiled, 
New gathered, and ambrosial smell diffused. To him she hasted; in her face excuse 
Came prologue, and apology too prompt; 
Which, with bland words at will, she thus addressed. Hast thou not wondered, Adam, at my stay? Thee I have missed, and thought it long, deprived 
Thy presence; agony of love till now 
Not felt, nor shall be twice; for never more 
Mean I to try, what rash untried I sought, 
The pain of absence from thy sight. But strange 
Hath been the cause, and wonderful to hear: 
This tree is not, as we are told, a tree 
Of danger tasted, nor to evil unknown 
Opening the way, but of divine effect 
To open eyes, and make them Gods who taste; 
And hath been tasted such:  The serpent wise, 
Or not restrained as we, or not obeying, 
Hath eaten of the fruit; and is become, 
Not dead, as we are threatened, but thenceforth 
Endued with human voice and human sense, 
Reasoning to admiration; and with me 
Persuasively hath so prevailed, that I 
Have also tasted, and have also found 
The effects to correspond; opener mine eyes, 
Dim erst, dilated spirits, ampler heart, 
And growing up to Godhead; which for thee 
Chiefly I sought, without thee can despise. For bliss, as thou hast part, to me is bliss; 
Tedious, unshared with thee, and odious soon. Thou therefore also taste, that equal lot 
May join us, equal joy, as equal love; 
Lest, thou not tasting, different degree 
Disjoin us, and I then too late renounce 
Deity for thee, when Fate will not permit. Thus Eve with countenance blithe her story told; 
But in her cheek distemper flushing glowed. On the other side Adam, soon as he heard 
The fatal trespass done by Eve, amazed, 
Astonied stood and blank, while horrour chill 
Ran through his veins, and all his joints relaxed; 
From his slack hand the garland wreathed for Eve 
Down dropt, and all the faded roses shed: 
Speechless he stood and pale, till thus at length 
First to himself he inward silence broke. O fairest of Creation, last and best 
Of all God's works, Creature in whom excelled 
Whatever can to sight or thought be formed, 
Holy, divine, good, amiable, or sweet! How art thou lost! how on a sudden lost, 
Defaced, deflowered, and now to death devote! Rather, how hast thou yielded to transgress 
The strict forbiddance, how to violate 
The sacred fruit forbidden! Some cursed fraud 
Of enemy hath beguiled thee, yet unknown, 
And me with thee hath ruined; for with thee 
Certain my resolution is to die: 
How can I live without thee! how forego 
Thy sweet converse, and love so dearly joined, 
To live again in these wild woods forlorn! Should God create another Eve, and I 
Another rib afford, yet loss of thee 
Would never from my heart: no, no!I feel 
The link of Nature draw me: flesh of flesh, 
Bone of my bone thou art, and from thy state 
Mine never shall be parted, bliss or woe. So having said, as one from sad dismay 
Recomforted, and after thoughts disturbed 
Submitting to what seemed remediless, 
Thus in calm mood his words to Eve he turned. Bold deed thou hast presumed, adventurous Eve, 
And peril great provoked, who thus hast dared, 
Had it been only coveting to eye 
That sacred fruit, sacred to abstinence, 
Much more to taste it under ban to touch. But past who can recall, or done undo? Not God Omnipotent, nor Fate; yet so 
Perhaps thou shalt not die, perhaps the fact 
Is not so heinous now, foretasted fruit, 
Profaned first by the serpent, by him first 
Made common, and unhallowed, ere our taste; 
Nor yet on him found deadly; yet he lives; 
Lives, as thou saidst, and gains to live, as Man, 
Higher degree of life; inducement strong 
To us, as likely tasting to attain 
Proportional ascent; which cannot be 
But to be Gods, or Angels, demi-Gods. Nor can I think that God, Creator wise, 
Though threatening, will in earnest so destroy 
Us his prime creatures, dignified so high, 
Set over all his works; which in our fall, 
For us created, needs with us must fail, 
Dependant made; so God shall uncreate, 
Be frustrate, do, undo, and labour lose; 
Not well conceived of God, who, though his power 
Creation could repeat, yet would be loth 
Us to abolish, lest the Adversary 
Triumph, and say; "Fickle their state whom God 
"Most favours; who can please him long? Me first 
"He ruined, now Mankind; whom will he next?" Matter of scorn, not to be given the Foe. However I with thee have fixed my lot, 
Certain to undergo like doom:  If death 
Consort with thee, death is to me as life; 
So forcible within my heart I feel 
The bond of Nature draw me to my own; 
My own in thee, for what thou art is mine; 
Our state cannot be severed; we are one, 
One flesh; to lose thee were to lose myself. So Adam; and thus Eve to him replied. O glorious trial of exceeding love, 
Illustrious evidence, example high! Engaging me to emulate; but, short 
Of thy perfection, how shall I attain, 
Adam, from whose dear side I boast me sprung, 
And gladly of our union hear thee speak, 
One heart, one soul in both; whereof good proof 
This day affords, declaring thee resolved, 
Rather than death, or aught than death more dread, 
Shall separate us, linked in love so dear, 
To undergo with me one guilt, one crime, 
If any be, of tasting this fair fruit; 
Whose virtue for of good still good proceeds, 
Direct, or by occasion, hath presented 
This happy trial of thy love, which else 
So eminently never had been known? Were it I thought death menaced would ensue 
This my attempt, I would sustain alone 
The worst, and not persuade thee, rather die 
Deserted, than oblige thee with a fact 
Pernicious to thy peace; chiefly assured 
Remarkably so late of thy so true, 
So faithful, love unequalled: but I feel 
Far otherwise the event; not death, but life 
Augmented, opened eyes, new hopes, new joys, 
Taste so divine, that what of sweet before 
Hath touched my sense, flat seems to this, and harsh. On my experience, Adam, freely taste, 
And fear of death deliver to the winds. So saying, she embraced him, and for joy 
Tenderly wept; much won, that he his love 
Had so ennobled, as of choice to incur 
Divine displeasure for her sake, or death. In recompence for such compliance bad 
Such recompence best merits from the bough 
She gave him of that fair enticing fruit 
With liberal hand: he scrupled not to eat, 
Against his better knowledge; not deceived, 
But fondly overcome with female charm. Earth trembled from her entrails, as again 
In pangs; and Nature gave a second groan; 
Sky loured; and, muttering thunder, some sad drops 
Wept at completing of the mortal sin 
Original: while Adam took no thought, 
Eating his fill; nor Eve to iterate 
Her former trespass feared, the more to sooth 
Him with her loved society; that now, 
As with new wine intoxicated both, 
They swim in mirth, and fancy that they feel 
Divinity within them breeding wings, 
Wherewith to scorn the earth:  But that false fruit 
Far other operation first displayed, 
Carnal desire inflaming; he on Eve 
Began to cast lascivious eyes; she him 
As wantonly repaid; in lust they burn: 
Till Adam thus 'gan Eve to dalliance move. Eve, now I see thou art exact of taste, 
And elegant, of sapience no small part; 
Since to each meaning savour we apply, 
And palate call judicious; I the praise 
Yield thee, so well this day thou hast purveyed. Much pleasure we have lost, while we abstained 
From this delightful fruit, nor known till now 
True relish, tasting; if such pleasure be 
In things to us forbidden, it might be wished, 
For this one tree had been forbidden ten. But come, so well refreshed, now let us play, 
As meet is, after such delicious fare; 
For never did thy beauty, since the day 
I saw thee first and wedded thee, adorned 
With all perfections, so inflame my sense 
With ardour to enjoy thee, fairer now 
Than ever; bounty of this virtuous tree! So said he, and forbore not glance or toy 
Of amorous intent; well understood 
Of Eve, whose eye darted contagious fire. Her hand he seised; and to a shady bank, 
Thick over-head with verdant roof imbowered, 
He led her nothing loth; flowers were the couch, 
Pansies, and violets, and asphodel, 
And hyacinth;  Earth's freshest softest lap. There they their fill of love and love's disport 
Took largely, of their mutual guilt the seal, 
The solace of their sin; till dewy sleep 
Oppressed them, wearied with their amorous play, 
Soon as the force of that fallacious fruit, 
That with exhilarating vapour bland 
About their spirits had played, and inmost powers 
Made err, was now exhaled; and grosser sleep, 
Bred of unkindly fumes, with conscious dreams 
Incumbered, now had left them; up they rose 
As from unrest; and, each the other viewing, 
Soon found their eyes how opened, and their minds 
How darkened; innocence, that as a veil 
Had shadowed them from knowing ill, was gone; 
Just confidence, and native righteousness, 
And honour, from about them, naked left 
To guilty Shame; he covered, but his robe 
Uncovered more. So rose the Danite strong, 
Herculean Samson, from the harlot-lap 
Of Philistean Dalilah, and waked 
Shorn of his strength. They destitute and bare 
Of all their virtue:  Silent, and in face 
Confounded, long they sat, as strucken mute: 
Till Adam, though not less than Eve abashed, 
At length gave utterance to these words constrained. O Eve, in evil hour thou didst give ear 
To that false worm, of whomsoever taught 
To counterfeit Man's voice; true in our fall, 
False in our promised rising; since our eyes 
Opened we find indeed, and find we know 
Both good and evil; good lost, and evil got; 
Bad fruit of knowledge, if this be to know; 
Which leaves us naked thus, of honour void, 
Of innocence, of faith, of purity, 
Our wonted ornaments now soiled and stained, 
And in our faces evident the signs 
Of foul concupiscence; whence evil store; 
Even shame, the last of evils; of the first 
Be sure then.--How shall I behold the face 
Henceforth of God or Angel, erst with joy 
And rapture so oft beheld? Those heavenly shapes 
Will dazzle now this earthly with their blaze 
Insufferably bright. O! might I here 
In solitude live savage; in some glade 
Obscured, where highest woods, impenetrable 
To star or sun-light, spread their umbrage broad 
And brown as evening:  Cover me, ye Pines! Ye Cedars, with innumerable boughs 
Hide me, where I may never see them more!-- 
But let us now, as in bad plight, devise 
What best may for the present serve to hide 
The parts of each from other, that seem most 
To shame obnoxious, and unseemliest seen; 
Some tree, whose broad smooth leaves together sewed, 
And girded on our loins, may cover round 
Those middle parts; that this new comer, Shame, 
There sit not, and reproach us as unclean. So counselled he, and both together went 
Into the thickest wood; there soon they chose 
The fig-tree; not that kind for fruit renowned, 
But such as at this day, to Indians known, 
In Malabar or Decan spreads her arms 
Branching so broad and long, that in the ground 
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow 
About the mother tree, a pillared shade 
High over-arched, and echoing walks between: 
There oft the Indian herdsman, shunning heat, 
Shelters in cool, and tends his pasturing herds 
At loop-holes cut through thickest shade:  Those leaves 
They gathered, broad as Amazonian targe; 
And, with what skill they had, together sewed, 
To gird their waist; vain covering, if to hide 
Their guilt and dreaded shame! O, how unlike 
To that first naked glory! Such of late 
Columbus found the American, so girt 
With feathered cincture; naked else, and wild 
Among the trees on isles and woody shores. Thus fenced, and, as they thought, their shame in part 
Covered, but not at rest or ease of mind, 
They sat them down to weep; nor only tears 
Rained at their eyes, but high winds worse within 
Began to rise, high passions, anger, hate, 
Mistrust, suspicion, discord; and shook sore 
Their inward state of mind, calm region once 
And full of peace, now tost and turbulent: 
For Understanding ruled not, and the Will 
Heard not her lore; both in subjection now 
To sensual Appetite, who from beneath 
Usurping over sovran Reason claimed 
Superiour sway: From thus distempered breast, 
Adam, estranged in look and altered style, 
Speech intermitted thus to Eve renewed. Would thou hadst hearkened to my words, and staid 
With me, as I besought thee, when that strange 
Desire of wandering, this unhappy morn, 
I know not whence possessed thee; we had then 
Remained still happy; not, as now, despoiled 
Of all our good; shamed, naked, miserable! Let none henceforth seek needless cause to approve 
The faith they owe; when earnestly they seek 
Such proof, conclude, they then begin to fail. To whom, soon moved with touch of blame, thus Eve. What words have passed thy lips, Adam severe! Imputest thou that to my default, or will 
Of wandering, as thou callest it, which who knows 
But might as ill have happened thou being by, 
Or to thyself perhaps? Hadst thou been there, 
Or here the attempt, thou couldst not have discerned 
Fraud in the Serpent, speaking as he spake; 
No ground of enmity between us known, 
Why he should mean me ill, or seek to harm. Was I to have never parted from thy side? As good have grown there still a lifeless rib. Being as I am, why didst not thou, the head, 
Command me absolutely not to go, 
Going into such danger, as thou saidst? Too facile then, thou didst not much gainsay; 
Nay, didst permit, approve, and fair dismiss. Hadst thou been firm and fixed in thy dissent, 
Neither had I transgressed, nor thou with me. To whom, then first incensed, Adam replied. Is this the love, is this the recompence 
Of mine to thee, ingrateful Eve! expressed 
Immutable, when thou wert lost, not I; 
Who might have lived, and joyed immortal bliss, 
Yet willingly chose rather death with thee? And am I now upbraided as the cause 
Of thy transgressing? Not enough severe, 
It seems, in thy restraint:  What could I more 
I warned thee, I admonished thee, foretold 
The danger, and the lurking enemy 
That lay in wait; beyond this, had been force; 
And force upon free will hath here no place. But confidence then bore thee on; secure 
Either to meet no danger, or to find 
Matter of glorious trial; and perhaps 
I also erred, in overmuch admiring 
What seemed in thee so perfect, that I thought 
No evil durst attempt thee; but I rue 
The errour now, which is become my crime, 
And thou the accuser. Thus it shall befall 
Him, who, to worth in women overtrusting, 
Lets her will rule: restraint she will not brook; 
And, left to herself, if evil thence ensue, 
She first his weak indulgence will accuse. Thus they in mutual accusation spent 
The fruitless hours, but neither self-condemning; 
And of their vain contest appeared no end. Book X                                                           
 
 
Mean while the heinous and despiteful act 
Of Satan, done in Paradise; and how 
He, in the serpent, had perverted Eve, 
Her husband she, to taste the fatal fruit, 
Was known in Heaven; for what can 'scape the eye 
Of God all-seeing, or deceive his heart 
Omniscient? who, in all things wise and just, 
Hindered not Satan to attempt the mind 
Of Man, with strength entire and free will armed, 
Complete to have discovered and repulsed 
Whatever wiles of foe or seeming friend. For still they knew, and ought to have still remembered, 
The high injunction, not to taste that fruit, 
Whoever tempted; which they not obeying, 
(Incurred what could they less?) the penalty; 
And, manifold in sin, deserved to fall. Up into Heaven from Paradise in haste 
The angelick guards ascended, mute, and sad, 
For Man; for of his state by this they knew, 
Much wondering how the subtle Fiend had stolen 
Entrance unseen. Soon as the unwelcome news 
From Earth arrived at Heaven-gate, displeased 
All were who heard; dim sadness did not spare 
That time celestial visages, yet, mixed 
With pity, violated not their bliss. About the new-arrived, in multitudes 
The ethereal people ran, to hear and know 
How all befel:  They towards the throne supreme, 
Accountable, made haste, to make appear, 
With righteous plea, their utmost vigilance 
And easily approved; when the Most High 
Eternal Father, from his secret cloud, 
Amidst in thunder uttered thus his voice. Assembled Angels, and ye Powers returned 
From unsuccessful charge; be not dismayed, 
Nor troubled at these tidings from the earth, 
Which your sincerest care could not prevent; 
Foretold so lately what would come to pass, 
When first this tempter crossed the gulf from Hell. I told ye then he should prevail, and speed 
On his bad errand; Man should be seduced, 
And flattered out of all, believing lies 
Against his Maker; no decree of mine 
Concurring to necessitate his fall, 
Or touch with lightest moment of impulse 
His free will, to her own inclining left 
In even scale. But fallen he is; and now 
What rests, but that the mortal sentence pass 
On his transgression,--death denounced that day? Which he presumes already vain and void, 
Because not yet inflicted, as he feared, 
By some immediate stroke; but soon shall find 
Forbearance no acquittance, ere day end. Justice shall not return as bounty scorned. But whom send I to judge them? whom but thee, 
Vicegerent Son? To thee I have transferred 
All judgement, whether in Heaven, or Earth, or Hell. Easy it may be seen that I intend 
Mercy colleague with justice, sending thee 
Man's friend, his Mediator, his designed 
Both ransom and Redeemer voluntary, 
And destined Man himself to judge Man fallen. So spake the Father; and, unfolding bright 
Toward the right hand his glory, on the Son 
Blazed forth unclouded Deity: He full 
Resplendent all his Father manifest 
Expressed, and thus divinely answered mild. Father Eternal, thine is to decree; 
Mine, both in Heaven and Earth, to do thy will 
Supreme; that thou in me, thy Son beloved, 
Mayest ever rest well pleased. I go to judge 
On earth these thy transgressours; but thou knowest, 
Whoever judged, the worst on me must light, 
When time shall be; for so I undertook 
Before thee; and, not repenting, this obtain 
Of right, that I may mitigate their doom 
On me derived; yet I shall temper so 
Justice with mercy, as may illustrate most 
Them fully satisfied, and thee appease. Attendance none shall need, nor train, where none 
Are to behold the judgement, but the judged, 
Those two; the third best absent is condemned, 
Convict by flight, and rebel to all law: 
Conviction to the serpent none belongs. Thus saying, from his radiant seat he rose 
Of high collateral glory: Him Thrones, and Powers, 
Princedoms, and Dominations ministrant, 
Accompanied to Heaven-gate; from whence 
Eden, and all the coast, in prospect lay. Down he descended straight; the speed of Gods 
Time counts not, though with swiftest minutes winged. Now was the sun in western cadence low 
From noon, and gentle airs, due at their hour, 
To fan the earth now waked, and usher in 
The evening cool; when he, from wrath more cool, 
Came the mild Judge, and Intercessour both, 
To sentence Man:  The voice of God they heard 
Now walking in the garden, by soft winds 
Brought to their ears, while day declined; they heard, 
And from his presence hid themselves among 
The thickest trees, both man and wife; till God, 
Approaching, thus to Adam called aloud. Where art thou, Adam, wont with joy to meet 
My coming seen far off? I miss thee here, 
Not pleased, thus entertained with solitude, 
Where obvious duty ere while appeared unsought: 
Or come I less conspicuous, or what change 
Absents thee, or what chance detains?--Come forth! He came; and with him Eve, more loth, though first 
To offend; discountenanced both, and discomposed; 
Love was not in their looks, either to God, 
Or to each other; but apparent guilt, 
And shame, and perturbation, and despair, 
Anger, and obstinacy, and hate, and guile. Whence Adam, faltering long, thus answered brief. I heard thee in the garden, and of thy voice 
Afraid, being naked, hid myself. To whom 
The gracious Judge without revile replied. My voice thou oft hast heard, and hast not feared, 
But still rejoiced; how is it now become 
So dreadful to thee? That thou art naked, who 
Hath told thee? Hast thou eaten of the tree, 
Whereof I gave thee charge thou shouldst not eat? To whom thus Adam sore beset replied. O Heaven! in evil strait this day I stand 
Before my Judge; either to undergo 
Myself the total crime, or to accuse 
My other self, the partner of my life; 
Whose failing, while her faith to me remains, 
I should conceal, and not expose to blame 
By my complaint: but strict necessity 
Subdues me, and calamitous constraint; 
Lest on my head both sin and punishment, 
However insupportable, be all 
Devolved; though should I hold my peace, yet thou 
Wouldst easily detect what I conceal.-- 
This Woman, whom thou madest to be my help, 
And gavest me as thy perfect gift, so good, 
So fit, so acceptable, so divine, 
That from her hand I could suspect no ill, 
And what she did, whatever in itself, 
Her doing seemed to justify the deed; 
She gave me of the tree, and I did eat. To whom the Sovran Presence thus replied. Was she thy God, that her thou didst obey 
Before his voice? or was she made thy guide, 
Superiour, or but equal, that to her 
Thou didst resign thy manhood, and the place 
Wherein God set thee above her made of thee, 
And for thee, whose perfection far excelled 
Hers in all real dignity? Adorned 
She was indeed, and lovely, to attract 
Thy love, not thy subjection; and her gifts 
Were such, as under government well seemed; 
Unseemly to bear rule; which was thy part 
And person, hadst thou known thyself aright. So having said, he thus to Eve in few. Say, Woman, what is this which thou hast done? To whom sad Eve, with shame nigh overwhelmed, 
Confessing soon, yet not before her Judge 
Bold or loquacious, thus abashed replied. The Serpent me beguiled, and I did eat. Which when the Lord God heard, without delay 
To judgement he proceeded on the accused 
Serpent, though brute; unable to transfer 
The guilt on him, who made him instrument 
Of mischief, and polluted from the end 
Of his creation; justly then accursed, 
As vitiated in nature:  More to know 
Concerned not Man, (since he no further knew) 
Nor altered his offence; yet God at last 
To Satan first in sin his doom applied, 
Though in mysterious terms, judged as then best: 
And on the Serpent thus his curse let fall. Because thou hast done this, thou art accursed 
Above all cattle, each beast of the field; 
Upon thy belly groveling thou shalt go, 
And dust shalt eat all the days of thy life. Between thee and the woman I will put 
Enmity, and between thine and her seed; 
Her seed shall bruise thy head, thou bruise his heel. So spake this oracle, then verified 
When Jesus, Son of Mary, second Eve, 
Saw Satan fall, like lightning, down from Heaven, 
Prince of the air; then, rising from his grave 
Spoiled Principalities and Powers, triumphed 
In open show; and, with ascension bright, 
Captivity led captive through the air, 
The realm itself of Satan, long usurped; 
Whom he shall tread at last under our feet; 
Even he, who now foretold his fatal bruise; 
And to the Woman thus his sentence turned. Thy sorrow I will greatly multiply 
By thy conception; children thou shalt bring 
In sorrow forth; and to thy husband's will 
Thine shall submit; he over thee shall rule. On Adam last thus judgement he pronounced. Because thou hast hearkened to the voice of thy wife, 
And eaten of the tree, concerning which 
I charged thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat thereof: 
Cursed is the ground for thy sake; thou in sorrow 
Shalt eat thereof, all the days of thy life; 
Thorns also and thistles it shall bring thee forth 
Unbid; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; 
In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, 
Till thou return unto the ground; for thou 
Out of the ground wast taken, know thy birth, 
For dust thou art, and shalt to dust return. So judged he Man, both Judge and Saviour sent; 
And the instant stroke of death, denounced that day, 
Removed far off; then, pitying how they stood 
Before him naked to the air, that now 
Must suffer change, disdained not to begin 
Thenceforth the form of servant to assume; 
As when he washed his servants feet; so now, 
As father of his family, he clad 
Their nakedness with skins of beasts, or slain, 
Or as the snake with youthful coat repaid; 
And thought not much to clothe his enemies; 
Nor he their outward only with the skins 
Of beasts, but inward nakedness, much more. Opprobrious, with his robe of righteousness, 
Arraying, covered from his Father's sight. To him with swift ascent he up returned, 
Into his blissful bosom reassumed 
In glory, as of old; to him appeased 
All, though all-knowing, what had passed with Man 
Recounted, mixing intercession sweet. Mean while, ere thus was sinned and judged on Earth, 
Within the gates of Hell sat Sin and Death, 
In counterview within the gates, that now 
Stood open wide, belching outrageous flame 
Far into Chaos, since the Fiend passed through, 
Sin opening; who thus now to Death began. O Son, why sit we here each other viewing 
Idly, while Satan, our great author, thrives 
In other worlds, and happier seat provides 
For us, his offspring dear? It cannot be 
But that success attends him; if mishap, 
Ere this he had returned, with fury driven 
By his avengers; since no place like this 
Can fit his punishment, or their revenge. Methinks I feel new strength within me rise, 
Wings growing, and dominion given me large 
Beyond this deep; whatever draws me on, 
Or sympathy, or some connatural force, 
Powerful at greatest distance to unite, 
With secret amity, things of like kind, 
By secretest conveyance. Thou, my shade 
Inseparable, must with me along; 
For Death from Sin no power can separate. But, lest the difficulty of passing back 
Stay his return perhaps over this gulf 
Impassable, impervious; let us try 
Adventurous work, yet to thy power and mine 
Not unagreeable, to found a path 
Over this main from Hell to that new world, 
Where Satan now prevails; a monument 
Of merit high to all the infernal host, 
Easing their passage hence, for intercourse, 
Or transmigration, as their lot shall lead. Nor can I miss the way, so strongly drawn 
By this new-felt attraction and instinct. Whom thus the meager Shadow answered soon. Go, whither Fate, and inclination strong, 
Leads thee; I shall not lag behind, nor err 
The way, thou leading; such a scent I draw 
Of carnage, prey innumerable, and taste 
The savour of death from all things there that live: 
Nor shall I to the work thou enterprisest 
Be wanting, but afford thee equal aid. So saying, with delight he snuffed the smell 
Of mortal change on earth. As when a flock 
Of ravenous fowl, though many a league remote, 
Against the day of battle, to a field, 
Where armies lie encamped, come flying, lured 
With scent of living carcasses designed 
For death, the following day, in bloody fight: 
So scented the grim Feature, and upturned 
His nostril wide into the murky air; 
Sagacious of his quarry from so far. Then both from out Hell-gates, into the waste 
Wide anarchy of Chaos, damp and dark, 
Flew diverse; and with power (their power was great) 
Hovering upon the waters, what they met 
Solid or slimy, as in raging sea 
Tost up and down, together crouded drove, 
From each side shoaling towards the mouth of Hell; 
As when two polar winds, blowing adverse 
Upon the Cronian sea, together drive 
Mountains of ice, that stop the imagined way 
Beyond Petsora eastward, to the rich 
Cathaian coast. The aggregated soil 
Death with his mace petrifick, cold and dry, 
As with a trident, smote; and fixed as firm 
As Delos, floating once; the rest his look 
Bound with Gorgonian rigour not to move; 
And with Asphaltick slime, broad as the gate, 
Deep to the roots of Hell the gathered beach 
They fastened, and the mole immense wrought on 
Over the foaming deep high-arched, a bridge 
Of length prodigious, joining to the wall 
Immoveable of this now fenceless world, 
Forfeit to Death; from hence a passage broad, 
Smooth, easy, inoffensive, down to Hell. So, if great things to small may be compared, 
Xerxes, the liberty of Greece to yoke, 
From Susa, his Memnonian palace high, 
Came to the sea: and, over Hellespont 
Bridging his way, Europe with Asia joined, 
And scourged with many a stroke the indignant waves. Now had they brought the work by wonderous art 
Pontifical, a ridge of pendant rock, 
Over the vexed abyss, following the track 
Of Satan to the self-same place where he 
First lighted from his wing, and landed safe 
From out of Chaos, to the outside bare 
Of this round world:  With pins of adamant 
And chains they made all fast, too fast they made 
And durable! And now in little space 
The confines met of empyrean Heaven, 
And of this World; and, on the left hand, Hell 
With long reach interposed; three several ways 
In sight, to each of these three places led. And now their way to Earth they had descried, 
To Paradise first tending; when, behold! Satan, in likeness of an Angel bright, 
Betwixt the Centaur and the Scorpion steering 
His zenith, while the sun in Aries rose: 
Disguised he came; but those his children dear 
Their parent soon discerned, though in disguise. He, after Eve seduced, unminded slunk 
Into the wood fast by; and, changing shape, 
To observe the sequel, saw his guileful act 
By Eve, though all unweeting, seconded 
Upon her husband; saw their shame that sought 
Vain covertures; but when he saw descend 
The Son of God to judge them, terrified 
He fled; not hoping to escape, but shun 
The present; fearing, guilty, what his wrath 
Might suddenly inflict; that past, returned 
By night, and listening where the hapless pair 
Sat in their sad discourse, and various plaint, 
Thence gathered his own doom; which understood 
Not instant, but of future time, with joy 
And tidings fraught, to Hell he now returned; 
And at the brink of Chaos, near the foot 
Of this new wonderous pontifice, unhoped 
Met, who to meet him came, his offspring dear. Great joy was at their meeting, and at sight 
Of that stupendious bridge his joy encreased. Long he admiring stood, till Sin, his fair 
Enchanting daughter, thus the silence broke. O Parent, these are thy magnifick deeds, 
Thy trophies! which thou viewest as not thine own; 
Thou art their author, and prime architect: 
For I no sooner in my heart divined, 
My heart, which by a secret harmony 
Still moves with thine, joined in connexion sweet, 
That thou on earth hadst prospered, which thy looks 
Now also evidence, but straight I felt, 
Though distant from thee worlds between, yet felt, 
That I must after thee, with this thy son; 
Such fatal consequence unites us three! Hell could no longer hold us in our bounds, 
Nor this unvoyageable gulf obscure 
Detain from following thy illustrious track. Thou hast achieved our liberty, confined 
Within Hell-gates till now; thou us impowered 
To fortify thus far, and overlay, 
With this portentous bridge, the dark abyss. Thine now is all this world; thy virtue hath won 
What thy hands builded not; thy wisdom gained 
With odds what war hath lost, and fully avenged 
Our foil in Heaven; here thou shalt monarch reign, 
There didst not; there let him still victor sway, 
As battle hath adjudged; from this new world 
Retiring, by his own doom alienated; 
And henceforth monarchy with thee divide 
Of all things, parted by the empyreal bounds, 
His quadrature, from thy orbicular world; 
Or try thee now more dangerous to his throne. Whom thus the Prince of darkness answered glad. Fair Daughter, and thou Son and Grandchild both; 
High proof ye now have given to be the race 
Of Satan (for I glory in the name, 
Antagonist of Heaven's Almighty King,) 
Amply have merited of me, of all 
The infernal empire, that so near Heaven's door 
Triumphal with triumphal act have met, 
Mine, with this glorious work; and made one realm, 
Hell and this world, one realm, one continent 
Of easy thorough-fare. Therefore, while I 
Descend through darkness, on your road with ease, 
To my associate Powers, them to acquaint 
With these successes, and with them rejoice; 
You two this way, among these numerous orbs, 
All yours, right down to Paradise descend; 
There dwell, and reign in bliss; thence on the earth 
Dominion exercise and in the air, 
Chiefly on Man, sole lord of all declared; 
Him first make sure your thrall, and lastly kill. My substitutes I send ye, and create 
Plenipotent on earth, of matchless might 
Issuing from me: on your joint vigour now 
My hold of this new kingdom all depends, 
Through Sin to Death exposed by my exploit. If your joint power prevail, the affairs of Hell 
No detriment need fear; go, and be strong! So saying he dismissed them; they with speed 
Their course through thickest constellations held, 
Spreading their bane; the blasted stars looked wan, 
And planets, planet-struck, real eclipse 
Then suffered. The other way Satan went down 
The causey to Hell-gate:  On either side 
Disparted Chaos overbuilt exclaimed, 
And with rebounding surge the bars assailed, 
That scorned his indignation:  Through the gate, 
Wide open and unguarded, Satan passed, 
And all about found desolate; for those, 
Appointed to sit there, had left their charge, 
Flown to the upper world; the rest were all 
Far to the inland retired, about the walls 
Of Pandemonium; city and proud seat 
Of Lucifer, so by allusion called 
Of that bright star to Satan paragoned; 
There kept their watch the legions, while the Grand 
In council sat, solicitous what chance 
Might intercept their emperour sent; so he 
Departing gave command, and they observed. As when the Tartar from his Russian foe, 
By Astracan, over the snowy plains, 
Retires; or Bactrin Sophi, from the horns 
Of Turkish crescent, leaves all waste beyond 
The realm of Aladule, in his retreat 
To Tauris or Casbeen:  So these, the late 
Heaven-banished host, left desart utmost Hell 
Many a dark league, reduced in careful watch 
Round their metropolis; and now expecting 
Each hour their great adventurer, from the search 
Of foreign worlds:  He through the midst unmarked, 
In show plebeian Angel militant 
Of lowest order, passed; and from the door 
Of that Plutonian hall, invisible 
Ascended his high throne; which, under state 
Of richest texture spread, at the upper end 
Was placed in regal lustre. Down a while 
He sat, and round about him saw unseen: 
At last, as from a cloud, his fulgent head 
And shape star-bright appeared, or brighter; clad 
With what permissive glory since his fall 
Was left him, or false glitter:  All amazed 
At that so sudden blaze the Stygian throng 
Bent their aspect, and whom they wished beheld, 
Their mighty Chief returned: loud was the acclaim: 
Forth rushed in haste the great consulting peers, 
Raised from their dark Divan, and with like joy 
Congratulant approached him; who with hand 
Silence, and with these words attention, won. Thrones, Dominations, Princedoms, Virtues, Powers; 
For in possession such, not only of right, 
I call ye, and declare ye now; returned 
Successful beyond hope, to lead ye forth 
Triumphant out of this infernal pit 
Abominable, accursed, the house of woe, 
And dungeon of our tyrant:  Now possess, 
As Lords, a spacious world, to our native Heaven 
Little inferiour, by my adventure hard 
With peril great achieved. Long were to tell 
What I have done; what suffered;with what pain 
Voyaged th' unreal, vast, unbounded deep 
Of horrible confusion; over which 
By Sin and Death a broad way now is paved, 
To expedite your glorious march; but I 
Toiled out my uncouth passage, forced to ride 
The untractable abyss, plunged in the womb 
Of unoriginal Night and Chaos wild; 
That, jealous of their secrets, fiercely opposed 
My journey strange, with clamorous uproar 
Protesting Fate supreme; thence how I found 
The new created world, which fame in Heaven 
Long had foretold, a fabrick wonderful 
Of absolute perfection! therein Man 
Placed in a Paradise, by our exile 
Made happy:  Him by fraud I have seduced 
From his Creator; and, the more to encrease 
Your wonder, with an apple; he, thereat 
Offended, worth your laughter! hath given up 
Both his beloved Man, and all his world, 
To Sin and Death a prey, and so to us, 
Without our hazard, labour, or alarm; 
To range in, and to dwell, and over Man 
To rule, as over all he should have ruled. True is, me also he hath judged, or rather 
Me not, but the brute serpent in whose shape 
Man I deceived: that which to me belongs, 
Is enmity which he will put between 
Me and mankind; I am to bruise his heel; 
His seed, when is not set, shall bruise my head: 
A world who would not purchase with a bruise, 
Or much more grievous pain?--Ye have the account 
Of my performance:  What remains, ye Gods, 
But up, and enter now into full bliss? So having said, a while he stood, expecting 
Their universal shout, and high applause, 
To fill his ear; when, contrary, he hears 
On all sides, from innumerable tongues, 
A dismal universal hiss, the sound 
Of publick scorn; he wondered, but not long 
Had leisure, wondering at himself now more, 
His visage drawn he felt to sharp and spare; 
His arms clung to his ribs; his legs entwining 
Each other, till supplanted down he fell 
A monstrous serpent on his belly prone, 
Reluctant, but in vain; a greater power 
Now ruled him, punished in the shape he sinned, 
According to his doom: he would have spoke, 
But hiss for hiss returned with forked tongue 
To forked tongue; for now were all transformed 
Alike, to serpents all, as accessories 
To his bold riot:  Dreadful was the din 
Of hissing through the hall, thick swarming now 
With complicated monsters head and tail, 
Scorpion, and Asp, and Amphisbaena dire, 
Cerastes horned, Hydrus, and Elops drear, 
And Dipsas; (not so thick swarmed once the soil 
Bedropt with blood of Gorgon, or the isle 
Ophiusa,) but still greatest he the midst, 
Now Dragon grown, larger than whom the sun 
Ingendered in the Pythian vale or slime, 
Huge Python, and his power no less he seemed 
Above the rest still to retain; they all 
Him followed, issuing forth to the open field, 
Where all yet left of that revolted rout, 
Heaven-fallen, in station stood or just array; 
Sublime with expectation when to see 
In triumph issuing forth their glorious Chief; 
They saw, but other sight instead! a croud 
Of ugly serpents; horrour on them fell, 
And horrid sympathy; for, what they saw, 
They felt themselves, now changing; down their arms, 
Down fell both spear and shield; down they as fast; 
And the dire hiss renewed, and the dire form 
Catched, by contagion; like in punishment, 
As in their crime. Thus was the applause they meant, 
Turned to exploding hiss, triumph to shame 
Cast on themselves from their own mouths. There stood 
A grove hard by, sprung up with this their change, 
His will who reigns above, to aggravate 
Their penance, laden with fair fruit, like that 
Which grew in Paradise, the bait of Eve 
Used by the Tempter: on that prospect strange 
Their earnest eyes they fixed, imagining 
For one forbidden tree a multitude 
Now risen, to work them further woe or shame; 
Yet, parched with scalding thirst and hunger fierce, 
Though to delude them sent, could not abstain; 
But on they rolled in heaps, and, up the trees 
Climbing, sat thicker than the snaky locks 
That curled Megaera: greedily they plucked 
The fruitage fair to sight, like that which grew 
Near that bituminous lake where Sodom flamed; 
This more delusive, not the touch, but taste 
Deceived; they, fondly thinking to allay 
Their appetite with gust, instead of fruit 
Chewed bitter ashes, which the offended taste 
With spattering noise rejected: oft they assayed, 
Hunger and thirst constraining; drugged as oft, 
With hatefullest disrelish writhed their jaws, 
With soot and cinders filled; so oft they fell 
Into the same illusion, not as Man 
Whom they triumphed once lapsed. Thus were they plagued 
And worn with famine, long and ceaseless hiss, 
Till their lost shape, permitted, they resumed; 
Yearly enjoined, some say, to undergo, 
This annual humbling certain numbered days, 
To dash their pride, and joy, for Man seduced. However, some tradition they dispersed 
Among the Heathen, of their purchase got, 
And fabled how the Serpent, whom they called 
Ophion, with Eurynome, the wide-- 
Encroaching Eve perhaps, had first the rule 
Of high Olympus; thence by Saturn driven 
And Ops, ere yet Dictaean Jove was born. Mean while in Paradise the hellish pair 
Too soon arrived; Sin, there in power before, 
Once actual; now in body, and to dwell 
Habitual habitant; behind her Death, 
Close following pace for pace, not mounted yet 
On his pale horse: to whom Sin thus began. Second of Satan sprung, all-conquering Death! What thinkest thou of our empire now, though earned 
With travel difficult, not better far 
Than still at Hell's dark threshold to have sat watch, 
Unnamed, undreaded, and thyself half starved? Whom thus the Sin-born monster answered soon. To me, who with eternal famine pine, 
Alike is Hell, or Paradise, or Heaven; 
There best, where most with ravine I may meet; 
Which here, though plenteous, all too little seems 
To stuff this maw, this vast unhide-bound corps. To whom the incestuous mother thus replied. Thou therefore on these herbs, and fruits, and flowers, 
Feed first; on each beast next, and fish, and fowl; 
No homely morsels! and, whatever thing 
The sithe of Time mows down, devour unspared; 
Till I, in Man residing, through the race, 
His thoughts, his looks, words, actions, all infect; 
And season him thy last and sweetest prey. This said, they both betook them several ways, 
Both to destroy, or unimmortal make 
All kinds, and for destruction to mature 
Sooner or later; which the Almighty seeing, 
From his transcendent seat the Saints among, 
To those bright Orders uttered thus his voice. See, with what heat these dogs of Hell advance 
To waste and havock yonder world, which I 
So fair and good created; and had still 
Kept in that state, had not the folly of Man 
Let in these wasteful furies, who impute 
Folly to me; so doth the Prince of Hell 
And his adherents, that with so much ease 
I suffer them to enter and possess 
A place so heavenly; and, conniving, seem 
To gratify my scornful enemies, 
That laugh, as if, transported with some fit 
Of passion, I to them had quitted all, 
At random yielded up to their misrule; 
And know not that I called, and drew them thither, 
My Hell-hounds, to lick up the draff and filth 
Which Man's polluting sin with taint hath shed 
On what was pure; til, crammed and gorged, nigh burst 
With sucked and glutted offal, at one sling 
Of thy victorious arm, well-pleasing Son, 
Both Sin, and Death, and yawning Grave, at last, 
Through Chaos hurled, obstruct the mouth of Hell 
For ever, and seal up his ravenous jaws. Then Heaven and Earth renewed shall be made pure 
To sanctity, that shall receive no stain: 
Till then, the curse pronounced on both precedes. He ended, and the heavenly audience loud 
Sung Halleluiah, as the sound of seas, 
Through multitude that sung:  Just are thy ways, 
Righteous are thy decrees on all thy works; 
Who can extenuate thee? Next, to the Son, 
Destined Restorer of mankind, by whom 
New Heaven and Earth shall to the ages rise, 
Or down from Heaven descend.--Such was their song; 
While the Creator, calling forth by name 
His mighty Angels, gave them several charge, 
As sorted best with present things. The sun 
Had first his precept so to move, so shine, 
As might affect the earth with cold and heat 
Scarce tolerable; and from the north to call 
Decrepit winter; from the south to bring 
Solstitial summer's heat. To the blanc moon 
Her office they prescribed; to the other five 
Their planetary motions, and aspects, 
In sextile, square, and trine, and opposite, 
Of noxious efficacy, and when to join 
In synod unbenign; and taught the fixed 
Their influence malignant when to shower, 
Which of them rising with the sun, or falling, 
Should prove tempestuous:  To the winds they set 
Their corners, when with bluster to confound 
Sea, air, and shore; the thunder when to roll 
With terrour through the dark aereal hall. Some say, he bid his Angels turn ascanse 
The poles of earth, twice ten degrees and more, 
From the sun's axle; they with labour pushed 
Oblique the centrick globe:  Some say, the sun 
Was bid turn reins from the equinoctial road 
Like distant breadth to Taurus with the seven 
Atlantick Sisters, and the Spartan Twins, 
Up to the Tropick Crab: thence down amain 
By Leo, and the Virgin, and the Scales, 
As deep as Capricorn; to bring in change 
Of seasons to each clime; else had the spring 
Perpetual smiled on earth with vernant flowers, 
Equal in days and nights, except to those 
Beyond the polar circles; to them day 
Had unbenighted shone, while the low sun, 
To recompense his distance, in their sight 
Had rounded still the horizon, and not known 
Or east or west; which had forbid the snow 
From cold Estotiland, and south as far 
Beneath Magellan. At that tasted fruit 
The sun, as from Thyestean banquet, turned 
His course intended; else, how had the world 
Inhabited, though sinless, more than now, 
Avoided pinching cold and scorching heat? These changes in the Heavens, though slow, produced 
Like change on sea and land; sideral blast, 
Vapour, and mist, and exhalation hot, 
Corrupt and pestilent:  Now from the north 
Of Norumbega, and the Samoed shore, 
Bursting their brazen dungeon, armed with ice, 
And snow, and hail, and stormy gust and flaw, 
Boreas, and Caecias, and Argestes loud, 
And Thrascias, rend the woods, and seas upturn; 
With adverse blast upturns them from the south 
Notus, and Afer black with thunderous clouds 
From Serraliona; thwart of these, as fierce, 
Forth rush the Levant and the Ponent winds, 
Eurus and Zephyr, with their lateral noise, 
Sirocco and Libecchio. Thus began 
Outrage from lifeless things; but Discord first, 
Daughter of Sin, among the irrational 
Death introduced, through fierce antipathy: 
Beast now with beast 'gan war, and fowl with fowl, 
And fish with fish; to graze the herb all leaving, 
Devoured each other; nor stood much in awe 
Of Man, but fled him; or, with countenance grim, 
Glared on him passing. These were from without 
The growing miseries, which Adam saw 
Already in part, though hid in gloomiest shade, 
To sorrow abandoned, but worse felt within; 
And, in a troubled sea of passion tost, 
Thus to disburden sought with sad complaint. O miserable of happy! Is this the end 
Of this new glorious world, and me so late 
The glory of that glory, who now become 
Accursed, of blessed? hide me from the face 
Of God, whom to behold was then my highth 
Of happiness!--Yet well, if here would end 
The misery; I deserved it, and would bear 
My own deservings; but this will not serve: 
All that I eat or drink, or shall beget, 
Is propagated curse. O voice, once heard 
Delightfully, Encrease and multiply; 
Now death to hear! for what can I encrease, 
Or multiply, but curses on my head? Who of all ages to succeed, but, feeling 
The evil on him brought by me, will curse 
My head? Ill fare our ancestor impure, 
For this we may thank Adam! but his thanks 
Shall be the execration: so, besides 
Mine own that bide upon me, all from me 
Shall with a fierce reflux on me rebound; 
On me, as on their natural center, light 
Heavy, though in their place. O fleeting joys 
Of Paradise, dear bought with lasting woes! Did I request thee, Maker, from my clay 
To mould me Man? did I solicit thee 
From darkness to promote me, or here place 
In this delicious garden? As my will 
Concurred not to my being, it were but right 
And equal to reduce me to my dust; 
Desirous to resign and render back 
All I received; unable to perform 
Thy terms too hard, by which I was to hold 
The good I sought not. To the loss of that, 
Sufficient penalty, why hast thou added 
The sense of endless woes? Inexplicable 
Why am I mocked with death, and lengthened out 
To deathless pain? How gladly would I meet 
Mortality my sentence, and be earth 
Insensible! How glad would lay me down 
As in my mother's lap! There I should rest, 
And sleep secure; his dreadful voice no more 
Would thunder in my ears; no fear of worse 
To me, and to my offspring, would torment me 
With cruel expectation. Yet one doubt 
Pursues me still, lest all I cannot die; 
Lest that pure breath of life, the spirit of Man 
Which God inspired, cannot together perish 
With this corporeal clod; then, in the grave, 
Or in some other dismal place, who knows 
But I shall die a living death? O thought 
Horrid, if true! Yet why? It was but breath 
Of life that sinned; what dies but what had life 
And sin? The body properly had neither, 
All of me then shall die: let this appease 
The doubt, since human reach no further knows. For though the Lord of all be infinite, 
Is his wrath also? Be it, Man is not so, 
But mortal doomed. How can he exercise 
Wrath without end on Man, whom death must end? Can he make deathless death? That were to make 
Strange contradiction, which to God himself 
Impossible is held; as argument 
Of weakness, not of power. Will he draw out, 
For anger's sake, finite to infinite, 
In punished Man, to satisfy his rigour, 
Satisfied never? That were to extend 
His sentence beyond dust and Nature's law; 
By which all causes else, according still 
To the reception of their matter, act; 
Not to the extent of their own sphere. But say 
That death be not one stroke, as I supposed, 
Bereaving sense, but endless misery 
From this day onward; which I feel begun 
Both in me, and without me; and so last 
To perpetuity;--Ay me!that fear 
Comes thundering back with dreadful revolution 
On my defenceless head; both Death and I 
Am found eternal, and incorporate both; 
Nor I on my part single; in me all 
Posterity stands cursed:  Fair patrimony 
That I must leave ye, Sons! O, were I able 
To waste it all myself, and leave ye none! So disinherited, how would you bless 
Me, now your curse! Ah, why should all mankind, 
For one man's fault, thus guiltless be condemned, 
It guiltless? But from me what can proceed, 
But all corrupt; both mind and will depraved 
Not to do only, but to will the same 
With me? How can they then acquitted stand 
In sight of God? Him, after all disputes, 
Forced I absolve: all my evasions vain, 
And reasonings, though through mazes, lead me still 
But to my own conviction: first and last 
On me, me only, as the source and spring 
Of all corruption, all the blame lights due; 
So might the wrath! Fond wish!couldst thou support 
That burden, heavier than the earth to bear; 
Than all the world much heavier, though divided 
With that bad Woman? Thus, what thou desirest, 
And what thou fearest, alike destroys all hope 
Of refuge, and concludes thee miserable 
Beyond all past example and future; 
To Satan only like both crime and doom. O Conscience! into what abyss of fears 
And horrours hast thou driven me; out of which 
I find no way, from deep to deeper plunged! Thus Adam to himself lamented loud, 
Through the still night; not now, as ere Man fell, 
Wholesome, and cool, and mild, but with black air 
Accompanied; with damps, and dreadful gloom; 
Which to his evil conscience represented 
All things with double terrour:  On the ground 
Outstretched he lay, on the cold ground; and oft 
Cursed his creation;  Death as oft accused 
Of tardy execution, since denounced 
The day of his offence.