To know my errand Madam

   Por. I would haue had thee there and heere agen
Ere I can tell thee what thou should'st do there:
O Constancie, be strong vpon my side,
Set a huge Mountaine 'tweene my Heart and Tongue:
I haue a mans minde, but a womans might:
How hard it is for women to keepe counsell. Art thou heere yet? Luc. Madam, what should I do? Run to the Capitoll, and nothing else? And so returne to you, and nothing else? Por. Yes, bring me word Boy, if thy Lord look well,
For he went sickly forth: and take good note
What Caesar doth, what Sutors presse to him. Hearke Boy, what noyse is that? Luc. I heare none Madam

   Por. Prythee listen well:
I heard a bussling Rumor like a Fray,
And the winde brings it from the Capitoll

   Luc. Sooth Madam, I heare nothing. Enter the Soothsayer. Por. Come hither Fellow, which way hast thou bin? Sooth. At mine owne house, good Lady

   Por. What is't a clocke? Sooth. About the ninth houre Lady

   Por. Is Caesar yet gone to the Capitoll? Sooth. Madam not yet, I go to take my stand,
To see him passe on to the Capitoll

   Por. Thou hast some suite to Caesar, hast thou not? Sooth. That I haue Lady, if it will please Caesar
To be so good to Caesar, as to heare me:
I shall beseech him to befriend himselfe

   Por. Why know'st thou any harme's intended towards
him? Sooth. None that I know will be,
Much that I feare may chance:
Good morrow to you: heere the street is narrow:
The throng that followes Caesar at the heeles,
Of Senators, of Praetors, common Sutors,
Will crowd a feeble man (almost) to death:
Ile get me to a place more voyd, and there
Speake to great Caesar as he comes along. Exit

  Por. I must go in:
Aye me! How weake a thing
The heart of woman is? O Brutus,
The Heauens speede thee in thine enterprize. Sure the Boy heard me: Brutus hath a suite
That Caesar will not grant. O, I grow faint:
Run Lucius, and commend me to my Lord,
Say I am merry; Come to me againe,
And bring me word what he doth say to thee. Exeunt. Actus Tertius. Flourish

Enter Caesar, Brutus, Cassius, Caska, Decius, Metellus, Trebonius,
Cynna,
Antony, Lepidus, Artimedorus, Publius, and the Soothsayer. Caes The Ides of March are come

   Sooth. I Caesar, but not gone

   Art. Haile Caesar: Read this Scedule

   Deci. Trebonius doth desire you to ore-read
(At your best leysure) this his humble suite

   Art. O Caesar, reade mine first: for mine's a suite
That touches Caesar neerer. Read it great Caesar

   Caes What touches vs our selfe, shall be last seru'd

   Art. Delay not Caesar, read it instantly

   Caes What, is the fellow mad? Pub. Sirra, giue place

   Cassi. What, vrge you your Petitions in the street? Come to the Capitoll

   Popil. I wish your enterprize to day may thriue

   Cassi. What enterprize Popillius? Popil. Fare you well

   Bru. What said Popillius Lena? Cassi. He wisht to day our enterprize might thriue:
I feare our purpose is discouered

   Bru. Looke how he makes to Caesar: marke him

   Cassi. Caska be sodaine, for we feare preuention. Brutus what shall be done? If this be knowne,
Cassius or Caesar neuer shall turne backe,
For I will slay my selfe

   Bru. Cassius be constant:
Popillius Lena speakes not of our purposes,
For looke he smiles, and Caesar doth not change

   Cassi. Trebonius knowes his time: for look you Brutus
He drawes Mark Antony out of the way

   Deci. Where is Metellus Cimber, let him go,
And presently preferre his suite to Caesar

   Bru. He is addrest: presse neere, and second him

   Cin. Caska, you are the first that reares your hand

   Caes Are we all ready? What is now amisse,
That Caesar and his Senate must redresse? Metel. Most high, most mighty, and most puisant Caesar
Metellus Cymber throwes before thy Seate
An humble heart

   Caes I must preuent thee Cymber:
These couchings, and these lowly courtesies
Might fire the blood of ordinary men,
And turne pre-Ordinance, and first Decree
Into the lane of Children. Be not fond,
To thinke that Caesar beares such Rebell blood
That will be thaw'd from the true quality
With that which melteth Fooles, I meane sweet words,
Low-crooked-curtsies, and base Spaniell fawning:
Thy Brother by decree is banished:
If thou doest bend, and pray, and fawne for him,
I spurne thee like a Curre out of my way:
Know, Caesar doth not wrong, nor without cause
Will he be satisfied

   Metel. Is there no voyce more worthy then my owne,
To sound more sweetly in great Caesars eare,
For the repealing of my banish'd Brother? Bru. I kisse thy hand, but not in flattery Caesar:
Desiring thee, that Publius Cymber may
Haue an immediate freedome of repeale

   Caes What Brutus? Cassi. Pardon Caesar: Caesar pardon:
As lowe as to thy foote doth Cassius fall,
To begge infranchisement for Publius Cymber

   Caes I could be well mou'd, if I were as you,
If I could pray to mooue, Prayers would mooue me:
But I am constant as the Northerne Starre,
Of whose true fixt, and resting quality,
There is no fellow in the Firmament. The Skies are painted with vnnumbred sparkes,
They are all Fire, and euery one doth shine:
But, there's but one in all doth hold his place. So, in the World; 'Tis furnish'd well with Men,
And Men are Flesh and Blood, and apprehensiue;
Yet in the number, I do know but One
That vnassayleable holds on his Ranke,
Vnshak'd of Motion: and that I am he,
Let me a little shew it, euen in this:
That I was constant Cymber should be banish'd,
And constant do remaine to keepe him so

   Cinna. O Caesar

   Caes Hence: Wilt thou lift vp Olympus? Decius. Great Caesar

   Caes Doth not Brutus bootlesse kneele? Cask. Speake hands for me. They stab Caesar. Caes Et Tu Brute? - Then fall Caesar. Dyes

  Cin. Liberty, Freedome; Tyranny is dead,
Run hence, proclaime, cry it about the Streets

   Cassi. Some to the common Pulpits, and cry out
Liberty, Freedome, and Enfranchisement

   Bru. People and Senators, be not affrighted:
Fly not, stand still: Ambitions debt is paid

   Cask. Go to the Pulpit Brutus

   Dec. And Cassius too

   Bru. Where's Publius? Cin. Heere, quite confounded with this mutiny

   Met. Stand fast together, least some Friend of Caesars
Should chance-
  Bru. Talke not of standing. Publius good cheere,
There is no harme intended to your person,
Nor to no Roman else: so tell them Publius

   Cassi. And leaue vs Publius, least that the people
Rushing on vs, should do your Age some mischiefe

   Bru. Do so, and let no man abide this deede,
But we the Doers. Enter Trebonius

   Cassi.