5:16 So the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth. 5:17 Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise
not thou the chastening of the Almighty: 5:18 For he maketh sore, and
bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole. 5:19 He shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall
no evil touch thee. 5:20 In famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the
power of the sword. 5:21 Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt
thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh. 5:22 At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be
afraid of the beasts of the earth. 5:23 For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the
beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. 5:24 And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace; and
thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin. 5:25 Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine
offspring as the grass of the earth. 5:26 Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of
corn cometh in in his season. 5:27 Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it
for thy good. 6:1 But Job answered and said, 6:2 Oh that my grief were throughly
weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together! 6:3 For now
it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are
swallowed up. 6:4 For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array
against me. 6:5 Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over
his fodder? 6:6 Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or
is there any taste in the white of an egg? 6:7 The things that my
soul refused to touch are as my sorrowful meat. 6:8 Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the
thing that I long for! 6:9 Even that it would please God to destroy
me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off! 6:10 Then
should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let
him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One. 6:11 What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end,
that I should prolong my life? 6:12 Is my strength the strength of
stones? or is my flesh of brass? 6:13 Is not my help in me? and is
wisdom driven quite from me? 6:14 To him that is afflicted pity
should be shewed from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the
Almighty. 6:15 My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream
of brooks they pass away; 6:16 Which are blackish by reason of the
ice, and wherein the snow is hid: 6:17 What time they wax warm, they
vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place. 6:18 The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and
perish. 6:19 The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for
them. 6:20 They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither,
and were ashamed. 6:21 For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid. 6:22 Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your
substance? 6:23 Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? or, Redeem me
from the hand of the mighty? 6:24 Teach me, and I will hold my
tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I have erred. 6:25 How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove? 6:26 Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is
desperate, which are as wind? 6:27 Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless,
and ye dig a pit for your friend. 6:28 Now therefore be content, look upon me; for it is evident unto
you if I lie. 6:29 Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my
righteousness is in it. 6:30 Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse
things? 7:1 Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not
his days also like the days of an hireling? 7:2 As a servant
earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling looketh for the
reward of his work: 7:3 So am I made to possess months of vanity, and
wearisome nights are appointed to me. 7:4 When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day. 7:5 My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is
broken, and become loathsome. 7:6 My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without
hope. 7:7 O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good. 7:8 The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes
are upon me, and I am not. 7:9 As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down
to the grave shall come up no more. 7:10 He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place
know him any more. 7:11 Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the
anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. 7:12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me? 7:13
When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaints; 7:14 Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me
through visions: 7:15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death
rather than my life. 7:16 I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days
are vanity. 7:17 What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou
shouldest set thine heart upon him? 7:18 And that thou shouldest
visit him every morning, and try him every moment? 7:19 How long wilt
thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my
spittle? 7:20 I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so
that I am a burden to myself? 7:21 And why dost thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away my iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the
dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be. 8:1 Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, 8:2 How long wilt thou
speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like
a strong wind? 8:3 Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty
pervert justice? 8:4 If thy children have sinned against him, and he
have cast them away for their transgression; 8:5 If thou wouldest seek
unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty; 8:6 If
thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and
make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. 8:7 Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
increase. 8:8 For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself
to the search of their fathers: 8:9 (For we are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:) 8:10 Shall
not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their
heart? 8:11 Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow
without water? 8:12 Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut
down, it withereth before any other herb. 8:13 So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite's hope
shall perish: 8:14 Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall
be a spider's web. 8:15 He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall
hold it fast, but it shall not endure. 8:16 He is green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his
garden. 8:17 His roots are wrapped about the heap, and seeth the place of
stones. 8:18 If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying,
I have not seen thee. 8:19 Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
others grow. 8:20 Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers: 8:21 Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and
thy lips with rejoicing. 8:22 They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling
place of the wicked shall come to nought. 9:1 Then Job answered and said, 9:2 I know it is so of a truth: but
how should man be just with God? 9:3 If he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand. 9:4 He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened
himself against him, and hath prospered? 9:5 Which removeth the
mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger. 9:6 Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble. 9:7 Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the
stars. 9:8 Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves
of the sea. 9:9 Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of
the south. 9:10 Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders
without number. 9:11 Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he passeth on also, but I
perceive him not. 9:12 Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto
him, What doest thou?