Let me see, let me see; is not the Leafe turn'd downe
Where I left reading? Heere it is I thinke. Enter the Ghost of Caesar. How ill this Taper burnes. Ha! Who comes heere? I thinke it is the weakenesse of mine eyes
That shapes this monstrous Apparition. It comes vpon me: Art thou any thing? Art thou some God, some Angell, or some Diuell,
That mak'st my blood cold, and my haire to stare? Speake to me, what thou art

   Ghost. Thy euill Spirit Brutus? Bru. Why com'st thou? Ghost. To tell thee thou shalt see me at Philippi

   Brut. Well: then I shall see thee againe? Ghost. I, at Philippi

   Brut. Why I will see thee at Philippi then:
Now I haue taken heart, thou vanishest. Ill Spirit, I would hold more talke with thee. Boy, Lucius, Varrus, Claudio, Sirs: Awake:
Claudio

   Luc. The strings my Lord, are false

   Bru. He thinkes he still is at his Instrument. Lucius, awake

   Luc. My Lord

   Bru. Did'st thou dreame Lucius, that thou so cryedst
out? Luc. My Lord, I do not know that I did cry

   Bru. Yes that thou did'st: Did'st thou see any thing? Luc. Nothing my Lord

   Bru. Sleepe againe Lucius: Sirra Claudio, Fellow,
Thou: Awake

   Var. My Lord

   Clau. My Lord

   Bru. Why did you so cry out sirs, in your sleepe? Both. Did we my Lord? Bru. I: saw you any thing? Var. No my Lord, I saw nothing

   Clau. Nor I my Lord

   Bru. Go, and commend me to my Brother Cassius:
Bid him set on his Powres betimes before,
And we will follow

   Both. It shall be done my Lord. Exeunt. Actus Quintus. Enter Octauius, Antony, and their Army. Octa. Now Antony, our hopes are answered,
You said the Enemy would not come downe,
But keepe the Hilles and vpper Regions:
It proues not so: their battailes are at hand,
They meane to warne vs at Philippi heere:
Answering before we do demand of them

   Ant. Tut I am in their bosomes, and I know
Wherefore they do it: They could be content
To visit other places, and come downe
With fearefull brauery: thinking by this face
To fasten in our thoughts that they haue Courage;
But 'tis not so. Enter a Messenger. Mes. Prepare you Generals,
The Enemy comes on in gallant shew:
Their bloody signe of Battell is hung out,
And something to be done immediately

   Ant. Octauius, leade your Battaile softly on
Vpon the left hand of the euen Field

   Octa. Vpon the right hand I, keepe thou the left

   Ant. Why do you crosse me in this exigent

   Octa. I do not crosse you: but I will do so. March. Drum. Enter Brutus, Cassius, & their Army. Bru. They stand, and would haue parley

   Cassi. Stand fast Titinius, we must out and talke

   Octa. Mark Antony, shall we giue signe of Battaile? Ant. No Caesar, we will answer on their Charge. Make forth, the Generals would haue some words

   Oct. Stirre not vntill the Signall

   Bru. Words before blowes: is it so Countrymen? Octa. Not that we loue words better, as you do

   Bru. Good words are better then bad strokes Octauius

   An. In your bad strokes Brutus, you giue good words
Witnesse the hole you made in Caesars heart,
Crying long liue, Haile Caesar

   Cassi. Antony,
The posture of your blowes are yet vnknowne;
But for your words, they rob the Hibla Bees,
And leaue them Hony-lesse

   Ant. Not stinglesse too

   Bru. O yes, and soundlesse too:
For you haue stolne their buzzing Antony,
And very wisely threat before you sting

   Ant. Villains: you did not so, when your vile daggers
Hackt one another in the sides of Caesar:
You shew'd your teethes like Apes,
And fawn'd like Hounds,
And bow'd like Bondmen, kissing Caesars feete;
Whil'st damned Caska, like a Curre, behinde
Strooke Caesar on the necke. O you Flatterers

   Cassi. Flatterers? Now Brutus thanke your selfe,
This tongue had not offended so to day. If Cassius might haue rul'd

   Octa. Come, come, the cause. If arguing make vs swet,
The proofe of it will turne to redder drops:
Looke, I draw a Sword against Conspirators,
When thinke you that the Sword goes vp againe? Neuer till Caesars three and thirtie wounds
Be well aueng'd; or till another Caesar
Haue added slaughter to the Sword of Traitors

   Brut. Caesar, thou canst not dye by Traitors hands. Vnlesse thou bring'st them with thee

   Octa. So I hope:
I was not borne to dye on Brutus Sword

   Bru. O if thou wer't the Noblest of thy Straine,
Yong-man, thou could'st not dye more honourable

   Cassi. A peeuish School-boy, worthles of such Honor
Ioyn'd with a Masker, and a Reueller

   Ant. Old Cassius still

   Octa. Come Antony: away:
Defiance Traitors, hurle we in your teeth. If you dare fight to day, come to the Field;
If not, when you haue stomackes. Exit Octauius, Antony, and Army

  Cassi. Why now blow winde, swell Billow,
And swimme Barke:
The Storme is vp, and all is on the hazard

   Bru. Ho Lucillius, hearke, a word with you. Lucillius and Messala stand forth. Luc. My Lord

   Cassi. Messala

   Messa. What sayes my Generall? Cassi.