We can direct our moral wills; but we can't generally change
our instinctive tastes and ways of doing things. Boulnois might
commit a murder, but not this murder. He would not snatch Romeo's sword
from its romantic scabbard; or slay his foe on the sundial as on
a kind of altar; or leave his body among the roses, or fling the sword
away among the pines. If Boulnois killed anyone he'd do it
quietly and heavily, as he'd do any other doubtful thing--
take a tenth glass of port, or read a loose Greek poet. No, the romantic setting is not like Boulnois. It's more like Champion." "Ah!" she said, and looked at him with eyes like diamonds. "And the trivial thing was this," said Brown. "There were
finger-prints on that sword; finger-prints can be detected quite
a time after they are made if they're on some polished surface
like glass or steel. These were on a polished surface. They were half-way down the blade of the sword. Whose prints they were
I have no earthly clue; but why should anybody hold a sword half-way down? It was a long sword, but length is an advantage in lunging at an enemy. At least, at most enemies. At all enemies except one." "Except one," she repeated. "There is only one enemy," said Father Brown, "whom it is easier
to kill with a dagger than a sword." "I know," said the woman. "Oneself." There was a long silence, and then the priest said quietly
but abruptly:  "Am I right, then? Did Sir Claude kill himself?" "Yes" she said, with a face like marble. "I saw him do it." "He died," said Father Brown, "for love of you?" An extraordinary expression flashed across her face,
very different from pity, modesty, remorse, or anything her companion
had expected:  her voice became suddenly strong and full. "I don't believe," she said, "he ever cared about me a rap. He hated my husband." "Why?" asked the other, and turned his round face from the sky
to the lady. "He hated my husband because...it is so strange I hardly know
how to say it...because..."

     "Yes?" said Brown patiently. "Because my husband wouldn't hate him." Father Brown only nodded, and seemed still to be listening;
he differed from most detectives in fact and fiction in a small point--
he never pretended not to understand when he understood perfectly well. Mrs Boulnois drew near once more with the same contained
glow of certainty. "My husband," she said, "is a great man. Sir Claude Champion was not a great man:  he was a celebrated and
successful man. My husband has never been celebrated or successful;
and it is the solemn truth that he has never dreamed of being so. He no more expects to be famous for thinking than for smoking cigars. On all that side he has a sort of splendid stupidity. He has never
grown up. He still liked Champion exactly as he liked him at school;
he admired him as he would admire a conjuring trick done at
the dinner-table. But he couldn't be got to conceive the notion of
envying Champion. And Champion wanted to be envied. He went mad
and killed himself for that." "Yes," said Father Brown; "I think I begin to understand." "Oh, don't you see?" she cried; "the whole picture is made for that--
the place is planned for it. Champion put John in a little house
at his very door, like a dependant--to make him feel a failure. He never felt it. He thinks no more about such things than--
than an absent-minded lion. Champion would burst in on John's
shabbiest hours or homeliest meals with some dazzling present or
announcement or expedition that made it like the visit of Haroun Alraschid,
and John would accept or refuse amiably with one eye off, so to speak,
like one lazy schoolboy agreeing or disagreeing with another. After five years of it John had not turned a hair; and Sir Claude Champion
was a monomaniac." "And Haman began to tell them," said Father Brown,
"of all the things wherein the king had honoured him; and he said:
`All these things profit me nothing while I see Mordecai the Jew
sitting in the gate.'" "The crisis came," Mrs Boulnois continued, "when I persuaded John
to let me take down some of his speculations and send them to a magazine. They began to attract attention, especially in America, and one paper
wanted to interview him. When Champion (who was interviewed
nearly every day) heard of this late little crumb of success
falling to his unconscious rival, the last link snapped that held back
his devilish hatred. Then he began to lay that insane siege to my own
love and honour which has been the talk of the shire. You will ask me
why I allowed such atrocious attentions. I answer that I could not have
declined them except by explaining to my husband, and there are
some things the soul cannot do, as the body cannot fly. Nobody could have explained to my husband. Nobody could do it now. If you said to him in so many words, `Champion is stealing your wife,'
he would think the joke a little vulgar:  that it could be anything
but a joke--that notion could find no crack in his great skull
to get in by. Well, John was to come and see us act this evening,
but just as we were starting he said he wouldn't; he had got
an interesting book and a cigar. I told this to Sir Claude,
and it was his death-blow. The monomaniac suddenly saw despair. He stabbed himself, crying out like a devil that Boulnois was slaying him;
he lies there in the garden dead of his own jealousy to produce jealousy,
and John is sitting in the dining-room reading a book." There was another silence, and then the little priest said:
"There is only one weak point, Mrs Boulnois, in all your
very vivid account. Your husband is not sitting in the dining-room
reading a book. That American reporter told me he had been to your house,
and your butler told him Mr Boulnois had gone to Pendragon Park after all." Her bright eyes widened to an almost electric glare;
and yet it seemed rather bewilderment than confusion or fear. "Why, what can you mean?" she cried. "All the servants were
out of the house, seeing the theatricals. And we don't keep a butler,
thank goodness!" Father Brown started and spun half round like an absurd teetotum. "What, what?" he cried seeming galvanized into sudden life. "Look here--I say--can I make your husband hear if I go to the house?" "Oh, the servants will be back by now," she said, wondering. "Right, right!" rejoined the cleric energetically, and set off
scuttling up the path towards the Park gates. He turned once to say:
"Better get hold of that Yankee, or `Crime of John Boulnois' will be
all over the Republic in large letters." "You don't understand," said Mrs Boulnois. "He wouldn't mind. I don't think he imagines that America really is a place." When Father Brown reached the house with the beehive and
the drowsy dog, a small and neat maid-servant showed him into
the dining-room, where Boulnois sat reading by a shaded lamp,
exactly as his wife described him. A decanter of port and a wineglass
were at his elbow; and the instant the priest entered he noted
the long ash stand out unbroken on his cigar. "He has been here for half an hour at least," thought Father Brown. In fact, he had the air of sitting where he had sat when his dinner
was cleared away. "Don't get up, Mr Boulnois," said the priest in his pleasant,
prosaic way. "I shan't interrupt you a moment. I fear I break in on
some of your scientific studies." "No," said Boulnois; "I was reading `The Bloody Thumb.'" He said it with neither frown nor smile, and his visitor was conscious
of a certain deep and virile indifference in the man which his wife
had called greatness. He laid down a gory yellow "shocker"
without even feeling its incongruity enough to comment on it humorously. John Boulnois was a big, slow-moving man with a massive head,
partly grey and partly bald, and blunt, burly features. He was in shabby and very old-fashioned evening-dress, with a narrow
triangular opening of shirt-front:  he had assumed it that evening
in his original purpose of going to see his wife act Juliet. "I won't keep you long from `The Bloody Thumb' or any other
catastrophic affairs," said Father Brown, smiling. "I only came
to ask you about the crime you committed this evening."