51:14 The captive exile hasteneth that he may be
loosed, and that he should not die in the pit, nor that his bread
should fail. 51:15 But I am the LORD thy God, that divided the sea, whose waves
roared: The LORD of hosts is his name. 51:16 And I have put my words in thy mouth, and I have covered thee in
the shadow of mine hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the
foundations of the earth, and say unto Zion, Thou art my people. 51:17 Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, which hast drunk at the
hand of the LORD the cup of his fury; thou hast drunken the dregs of
the cup of trembling, and wrung them out. 51:18 There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she hath
brought forth; neither is there any that taketh her by the hand of all
the sons that she hath brought up. 51:19 These two things are come unto thee; who shall be sorry for
thee? desolation, and destruction, and the famine, and the sword: by
whom shall I comfort thee? 51:20 Thy sons have fainted, they lie at
the head of all the streets, as a wild bull in a net: they are full of
the fury of the LORD, the rebuke of thy God. 51:21 Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not
with wine: 51:22 Thus saith thy Lord the LORD, and thy God that
pleadeth the cause of his people, Behold, I have taken out of thine
hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup of my fury; thou
shalt no more drink it again: 51:23 But I will put it into the hand of
them that afflict thee; which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we
may go over: and thou hast laid thy body as the ground, and as the
street, to them that went over. 52:1 Awake, awake; put on thy strength, O Zion; put on thy beautiful
garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city: for henceforth there shall no
more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. 52:2 Shake thyself from the dust; arise, and sit down, O Jerusalem:
loose thyself from the bands of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion. 52:3 For thus saith the LORD, Ye have sold yourselves for nought; and
ye shall be redeemed without money. 52:4 For thus saith the Lord GOD, My people went down aforetime into
Egypt to sojourn there; and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause. 52:5 Now therefore, what have I here, saith the LORD, that my people
is taken away for nought? they that rule over them make them to howl,
saith the LORD; and my name continually every day is blasphemed. 52:6 Therefore my people shall know my name: therefore they shall know
in that day that I am he that doth speak: behold, it is I. 52:7 How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that
bringeth good tidings, that publisheth peace; that bringeth good
tidings of good, that publisheth salvation; that saith unto Zion, Thy
God reigneth! 52:8 Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice; with the
voice together shall they sing: for they shall see eye to eye, when
the LORD shall bring again Zion. 52:9 Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of
Jerusalem: for the LORD hath comforted his people, he hath redeemed
Jerusalem. 52:10 The LORD hath made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the
nations; and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our
God. 52:11 Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from thence, touch no unclean
thing; go ye out of the midst of her; be ye clean, that bear the
vessels of the LORD. 52:12 For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight: for the
LORD will go before you; and the God of Israel will be your rereward. 52:13 Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted and
extolled, and be very high. 52:14 As many were astonied at thee; his visage was so marred more
than any man, and his form more than the sons of men: 52:15 So shall
he sprinkle many nations; the kings shall shut their mouths at him:
for that which had not been told them shall they see; and that which
they had not heard shall they consider. 53:1 Who hath believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the LORD
revealed? 53:2 For he shall grow up before him as a tender plant, and
as a root out of a dry ground: he hath no form nor comeliness; and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him. 53:3 He is despised and rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief: and we hid as it were our faces from him; he
was despised, and we esteemed him not. 53:4 Surely he hath borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows: yet we
did esteem him stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted. 53:5 But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him; and with his
stripes we are healed. 53:6 All we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to
his own way; and the LORD hath laid on him the iniquity of us all. 53:7 He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his
mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before
her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth. 53:8 He was taken from prison and from judgment: and who shall declare
his generation? for he was cut off out of the land of the living: for
the transgression of my people was he stricken. 53:9 And he made his grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his
death; because he had done no violence, neither was any deceit in his
mouth. 53:10 Yet it pleased the LORD to bruise him; he hath put him to grief:
when thou shalt make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his
seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the LORD shall
prosper in his hand. 53:11 He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied:
by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he shall
bear their iniquities. 53:12 Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he
shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he hath poured out his
soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors; and he
bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. 54:1 Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear; break forth into
singing, and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child: for
more are the children of the desolate than the children of the married
wife, saith the LORD. 54:2 Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the
curtains of thine habitations: spare not, lengthen thy cords, and
strengthen thy stakes; 54:3 For thou shalt break forth on the right
hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and
make the desolate cities to be inhabited. 54:4 Fear not; for thou shalt not be ashamed: neither be thou
confounded; for thou shalt not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget
the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy
widowhood any more. 54:5 For thy Maker is thine husband; the LORD of hosts is his name;
and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; The God of the whole earth
shall he be called. 54:6 For the LORD hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in
spirit, and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. 54:7 For a small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies
will I gather thee. 54:8 In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with
everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the LORD thy
Redeemer. 54:9 For this is as the waters of Noah unto me: for as I have sworn
that the waters of Noah should no more go over the earth; so have I
sworn that I would not be wroth with thee, nor rebuke thee. 54:10 For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed; but my
kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my
peace be removed, saith the LORD that hath mercy on thee. 54:11 O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted,
behold, I will lay thy stones with fair colours, and lay thy
foundations with sapphires. 54:12 And I will make thy windows of agates, and thy gates of
carbuncles, and all thy borders of pleasant stones. 54:13 And all thy children shall be taught of the LORD; and great
shall be the peace of thy children. 54:14 In righteousness shalt thou be established: thou shalt be far
from oppression; for thou shalt not fear: and from terror; for it
shall not come near thee. 54:15 Behold, they shall surely gather together, but not by me:
whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake. 54:16 Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the
fire, and that bringeth forth an instrument for his work; and I have
created the waster to destroy. 54:17 No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper; and every
tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the LORD, and their
righteousness is of me, saith the LORD. 55:1 Ho, every one that thirsteth, come ye to the waters, and he that
hath no money; come ye, buy, and eat; yea, come, buy wine and milk
without money and without price. 55:2 Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your
labour for that which satisfieth not? hearken diligently unto me, and
eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in
fatness. 55:3 Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall
live; and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David. 55:4 Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader
and commander to the people. 55:5 Behold, thou shalt call a nation that thou knowest not, and
nations that knew not thee shall run unto thee because of the LORD thy
God, and for the Holy One of Israel; for he hath glorified thee. 55:6 Seek ye the LORD while he may be found, call ye upon him while he
is near: 55:7 Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts: and let him return unto the LORD, and he will have mercy
upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. 55:8 For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways my
ways, saith the LORD. 55:9 For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways
higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. 55:10 For as the rain cometh down, and the snow from heaven, and
returneth not thither, but watereth the earth, and maketh it bring
forth and bud, that it may give seed to the sower, and bread to the
eater: 55:11 So shall my word be that goeth forth out of my mouth: it
shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I
please, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it. 55:12 For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace: the
mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and
all the trees of the field shall clap their hands. 55:13 Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of
the brier shall come up the myrtle tree: and it shall be to the LORD
for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off. 56:1 Thus saith the LORD, Keep ye judgment, and do justice: for my
salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed. 56:2 Blessed is the man that doeth this, and the son of man that
layeth hold on it; that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and
keepeth his hand from doing any evil. 56:3 Neither let the son of the stranger, that hath joined himself to
the LORD, speak, saying, The LORD hath utterly separated me from his
people: neither let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree. 56:4 For thus saith the LORD unto the eunuchs that keep my sabbaths,
and choose the things that please me, and take hold of my covenant;
56:5 Even unto them will I give in mine house and within my walls a
place and a name better than of sons and of daughters: I will give
them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off. 56:6 Also the sons of the stranger, that join themselves to the LORD,
to serve him, and to love the name of the LORD, to be his servants,
every one that keepeth the sabbath from polluting it, and taketh hold
of my covenant; 56:7 Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and
make them joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt offerings and
their sacrifices shall be accepted upon mine altar; for mine house
shall be called an house of prayer for all people. 56:8 The Lord GOD, which gathereth the outcasts of Israel saith, Yet
will I gather others to him, beside those that are gathered unto him. 56:9 All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in
the forest. 56:10 His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are all dumb
dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber. 56:11 Yea, they are greedy dogs which can never have enough, and they
are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way,
every one for his gain, from his quarter. 56:12 Come ye, say they, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves
with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant. 57:1 The righteous perisheth, and no man layeth it to heart: and
merciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is
taken away from the evil to come. 57:2 He shall enter into peace: they shall rest in their beds, each
one walking in his uprightness. 57:3 But draw near hither, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the
adulterer and the whore. 57:4 Against whom do ye sport yourselves? against whom make ye a wide
mouth, and draw out the tongue? are ye not children of transgression,
a seed of falsehood. 57:5 Enflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree, slaying
the children in the valleys under the clifts of the rocks? 57:6 Among
the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion; they, they are thy
lot: even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered
a meat offering. Should I receive comfort in these? 57:7 Upon a lofty
and high mountain hast thou set thy bed: even thither wentest thou up
to offer sacrifice. 57:8 Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy
remembrance: for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me, and
art gone up; thou hast enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with
them; thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it. 57:9 And thou wentest to the king with ointment, and didst increase
thy perfumes, and didst send thy messengers far off, and didst debase
thyself even unto hell. 57:10 Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way; yet saidst thou
not, There is no hope: thou hast found the life of thine hand;
therefore thou wast not grieved. 57:11 And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast
lied, and hast not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? have not I
held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not? 57:12 I will
declare thy righteousness, and thy works; for they shall not profit
thee. 57:13 When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee; but the wind
shall carry them all away; vanity shall take them: but he that putteth
his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy
mountain; 57:14 And shall say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the
way, take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people. 57:15 For thus saith the high and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity,
whose name is Holy; I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. 57:16 For I will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth:
for the spirit should fail before me, and the souls which I have made. 57:17 For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him:
I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart. 57:18 I have seen his ways, and will heal him: I will lead him also,
and restore comforts unto him and to his mourners. 57:19 I create the fruit of the lips; Peace, peace to him that is far
off, and to him that is near, saith the LORD; and I will heal him.