Blacky is a schemer! His voice is strong;
    When things go wrong
  Blacky is a screamer! It's a fact. Blacky the Crow is forever dreaming and scheming and almost
always it is of mischief. He is one of the smartest and cleverest of all
the little people of the Green Meadows and the Green Forest, and all the
others know it. Blacky likes excitement. He wants something going on. The more exciting it is, the better he likes it. Then he has a chance to
use that harsh voice of his, and how he does use it! So now, as he sat in the top of the Big Hickory-tree beside the Smiling
Pool and looked down on all the little people gathered there, he was
very happy. In the first place he felt very important, and you know
Blacky dearly loves to feel important. They had all come at his
invitation to listen to a plan for seeing for themselves if it were
really true that Farmer Brown's boy was afraid of Buster Bear. On the Big Rock in the Smiling Pool sat Little Joe Otter, Billy Mink,
and Jerry Muskrat. On his big, green lily-pad sat Grandfather Frog. On
another lily-pad sat Spotty the Turtle. On the bank on one side of the
Smiling Pool were Peter Rabbit, Jumper the Hare, Danny Meadow Mouse,
Johnny Chuck, Jimmy Skunk, Unc' Billy Possum, Striped Chipmunk and Old
Mr. Toad. On the other side of the Smiling Pool were Reddy Fox, Digger
the Badger, and Bobby Coon. In the Big Hickory-tree were Chatterer the
Red Squirrel, Happy Jack the Gray Squirrel, and Sammy Jay. Blacky waited until he was sure that no one else was coming. Then he
cleared his throat very loudly and began to speak. "Friends," said he. Everybody grinned, for Blacky has played so many sharp tricks that no
one is really his friend unless it is that other mischief-maker, Sammy
Jay, who, you know, is Blacky's cousin. But no one said anything, and
Blacky went on. "Little Joe Otter has told us how he saw Farmer Brown's boy hurry home
when he found the footprint of Buster Bear on the edge of the Laughing
Brook, and how all the way he kept looking behind him, as if he were
afraid. Perhaps he was, and then again perhaps he wasn't. Perhaps he had
something else on his mind. You have made a hero of Buster Bear, because
you believe Little Joe's story. Now I don't say that I don't believe it,
but I do say that I will be a lot more sure that Farmer Brown's boy is
afraid of Buster when I see him run away myself. Now here is my plan:

"To-morrow morning, very early, Sammy Jay and I will make a great fuss
near the edge of the Green Forest. Farmer Brown's boy has a lot of
curiosity, and he will be sure to come over to see what it is all about. Then we will lead him to where Buster Bear is. If he runs away, I will
be the first to admit that Buster Bear is as great a hero as some of you
seem to think he is. It is a very simple plan, and if you will all hide
where you can watch, you will be able to see for yourselves if Little
Joe Otter is right. Now what do you say?" Right away everybody began to talk at the same time. It was such a
simple plan that everybody agreed to it. And it promised to be so
exciting that everybody promised to be there, that is, everybody but
Grandfather Frog and Spotty the Turtle, who didn't care to go so far
away from the Smiling Pool. So it was agreed that Blacky should try his
plan the very next morning. XII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY AND BUSTER BEAR GROW CURIOUS


Ever since it was light enough to see at all, Blacky the Crow had been
sitting in the top of the tallest tree on the edge of the Green Forest
nearest to Farmer Brown's house, and never for an instant had he taken
his eyes from Farmer Brown's back door. What was he watching for? Why,
for Farmer Brown's boy to come out on his way to milk the cows. Meanwhile, Sammy Jay was slipping silently through the Green Forest,
looking for Buster Bear, so that when the time came he could let his
cousin, Blacky the Crow, know just where Buster was. By and by the back door of Farmer Brown's house opened, and out stepped
Farmer Brown's boy. In each hand he carried a milk pail. Right away
Blacky began to scream at the top of his lungs. "Caw, caw, caw!" shouted
Blacky. "Caw, caw, caw!" And all the time he flew about among the trees
near the edge of the Green Forest as if so excited that he couldn't keep
still. Farmer Brown's boy looked over there as if he wondered what all
that fuss was about, as indeed he did, but he didn't start to go over
and see. No, Sir, he started straight for the barn. Blacky didn't know what to make of it. You see, smart as he is and
shrewd as he is, Blacky doesn't know anything about the meaning of duty,
for he never has to work excepting to get enough to eat. So, when Farmer
Brown's boy started for the barn instead of for the Green Forest,
Blacky didn't know what to make of it. He screamed harder and louder
than ever, until his voice grew so hoarse he couldn't scream any more,
but Farmer Brown's boy kept right on to the barn. "I'd like to know what you're making such a fuss about, Mr. Crow, but
I've got to feed the cows and milk them first," said he. Now all this time the other little people of the Green Forest and the
Green Meadows had been hiding where they could see all that went on. When Farmer Brown's boy disappeared in the barn, Chatterer the Red
Squirrel snickered right out loud. "Ha, ha, ha! This is a great plan of
yours, Blacky! Ha, ha, ha!" he shouted. Blacky couldn't find a word to
say. He just hung his head, which is something Blacky seldom does. "Perhaps if we wait until he comes out again, he will come over here,"
said Sammy Jay, who had joined Blacky. So it was decided to wait. It
seemed as if Farmer Brown's boy never would come out, but at last he
did. Blacky and Sammy Jay at once began to scream and make all the fuss
they could. Farmer Brown's boy took the two pails of milk into the
house, then out he came and started straight for the Green Forest. He
was so curious to know what it all meant that he couldn't wait another
minute. Now there was some one else with a great deal of curiosity also. He had
heard the screaming of Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay, and he had
listened until he couldn't stand it another minute. He just _had_ to
know what it was all about. So at the same time Farmer Brown's boy
started for the Green Forest, this other listener started towards the
place where Blacky and Sammy were making such a racket. He walked very
softly so as not to make a sound. It was Buster Bear. XIII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY AND BUSTER BEAR MEET


  If you should meet with Buster Bear
    While walking through the wood,
  What would you do? Now tell me true,
    _I'd_ run the best I could. That is what Farmer Brown's boy did when he met Buster Bear, and a lot
of the little people of the Green Forest and some from the Green Meadows
saw him. When Farmer Brown's boy came hurrying home from the Laughing
Brook without any fish one day and told about the great footprint he had
seen in a muddy place on the bank deep in the Green Forest, and had said
his was sure that it was the footprint of a Bear, he had been laughed
at. Farmer Brown had laughed and laughed. "Why," said he, "there hasn't been a Bear in the Green Forest for years
and years and years, not since my own grandfather was a little boy, and
that, you know, was a long, long, long time ago. If you want to find Mr.
Bear, you will have to go to the Great Woods. I don't know who made that
footprint, but it certainly couldn't have been a Bear. I think you must
have imagined it." Then he had laughed some more, all of which goes to show how easy it is
to be mistaken, and how foolish it is to laugh at things you really
don't know about. Buster Bear _had_ come to live in the Green Forest,
and Farmer Brown's boy _had_ seen his footprint. But Farmer Brown
laughed so much and made fun of him so much, that at last his boy began
to think that he must have been mistaken after all. So when he heard
Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay making a great fuss near the edge of the
Green Forest, he never once thought of Buster Bear, as he started over
to see what was going on. When Blacky and Sammy saw him coming, they moved a little farther in to
the Green Forest, still screaming in the most excited way. They felt
sure that Farmer Brown's boy would follow them, and they meant to lead
him to where Sammy had seen Buster Bear that morning. Then they would
find out for sure if what Little Joe Otter had said was true,--that
Farmer Brown's boy really was afraid of Buster Bear. Now all around, behind trees and stumps, and under thick branches, and
even in tree tops, were other little people watching with round,
wide-open eyes to see what would happen. It was very exciting, the most
exciting thing they could remember. You see, they had come to believe
that Farmer Brown's boy wasn't afraid of anybody or anything, and as
most of them were very much afraid of him, they had hard work to believe
that he would really be afraid of even such a great, big, strong fellow
as Buster Bear. Every one was so busy watching Farmer Brown's boy that
no one saw Buster coming from the other direction. You see, Buster walked very softly. Big as he is, he can walk without
making the teeniest, weeniest sound. And that is how it happened that no
one saw him or heard him until just as Farmer Brown's boy stepped out
from behind one side of a thick little hemlock-tree, Buster Bear stepped
out from behind the other side of that same little tree, and there they
were face to face! Then everybody held their breath, even Blacky the
Crow and Sammy Jay.