The higher and higher it rose the broader and
broader became the scenes of flame and desolation underneath. Ludgate Hill indeed had been an uncaptured and comparatively
quiet height, altered only by the startling coincidence of the
cross fallen awry. All the other thoroughfares on all sides of
that hill were full of the pulsation and the pain of battle, full
of shaking torches and shouting faces. When at length they had
risen high enough to have a bird's-eye view of the whole
campaign, Turnbull was already intoxicated. He had smelt
gunpowder, which was the incense of his own revolutionary
religion. "Have the people really risen?" he asked, breathlessly. "What are
they fighting about?" "The programme is rather elaborate," said his entertainer with
some indifference. "I think Dr. Hertz drew it up." Turnbull wrinkled his forehead. "Are all the poor people with the
Revolution?" he asked. The other shrugged his shoulders. "All the instructed and
class-conscious part of them without exception," he replied. "There were certainly a few districts; in fact, we are passing
over them just now----"

Turnbull looked down and saw that the polished car was literally
lit up from underneath by the far-flung fires from below. Underneath whole squares and solid districts were in flames, like
prairies or forests on fire. "Dr. Hertz has convinced everybody," said Turnbull's cicerone in
a smooth voice, "that nothing can really be done with the real
slums. His celebrated maxim has been quite adopted. I mean the
three celebrated sentences: 'No man should be unemployed. Employ
the employables. Destroy the unemployables.'" There was a silence, and then Turnbull said in a rather strained
voice: "And do I understand that this good work is going on under
here?" "Going on splendidly," replied his companion in the heartiest
voice. "You see, these people were much too tired and weak even
to join the social war. They were a definite hindrance to it." "And so you are simply burning them out?" "It _does_ seem absurdly simple," said the man, with a beaming
smile, "when one thinks of all the worry and talk about helping a
hopeless slave population, when the future obviously was only
crying to be rid of them. There are happy babes unborn ready to
burst the doors when these drivellers are swept away." "Will you permit me to say," said Turnbull, after reflection,
"that I don't like all this?" "And will you permit me to say," said the other, with a snap,
"that I don't like Mr. Evan MacIan?" Somewhat to the speaker's surprise this did not inflame the
sensitive sceptic; he had the air of thinking thoroughly, and
then he said: "No, I don't think it's my friend MacIan that
taught me that. I think I should always have said that I don't
like this. These people have rights." "Rights!" repeated the unknown in a tone quite indescribable. Then he added with a more open sneer: "Perhaps they also have
souls." "They have lives!" said Turnbull, sternly; "that is quite enough
for me. I understood you to say that you thought life sacred." "Yes, indeed!" cried his mentor with a sort of idealistic
animation. "Yes, indeed! Life is sacred--but lives are not
sacred. We are improving Life by removing lives. Can you, as a
free-thinker, find any fault in that?" "Yes," said Turnbull with brevity. "Yet you applaud tyrannicide," said the stranger with
rationalistic gaiety. "How inconsistent! It really comes to
this: You approve of taking away life from those to whom it is a
triumph and a pleasure. But you will not take away life from
those to whom it is a burden and a toil." Turnbull rose to his feet in the car with considerable
deliberation, but his face seemed oddly pale. The other went on
with enthusiasm. "Life, yes, Life is indeed sacred!" he cried; "but new lives for
old! Good lives for bad! On that very place where now there
sprawls one drunken wastrel of a pavement artist more or less
wishing he were dead--on that very spot there shall in the future
be living pictures; there shall be golden girls and boys leaping
in the sun." Turnbull, still standing up, opened his lips. "Will you put me
down, please?" he said, quite calmly, like on stopping an
omnibus. "Put you down--what do you mean?" cried his leader. "I am taking
you to the front of the revolutionary war, where you will be one
of the first of the revolutionary leaders." "Thank you," replied Turnbull with the same painful constraint. "I have heard about your revolutionary war, and I think on the
whole that I would rather be anywhere else." "Do you want to be taken to a monastery," snarled the other,
"with MacIan and his winking Madonnas." "I want to be taken to a madhouse," said Turnbull distinctly,
giving the direction with a sort of precision. "I want to go back
to exactly the same lunatic asylum from which I came." "Why?" asked the unknown. "Because I want a little sane and wholesome society," answered
Turnbull. There was a long and peculiar silence, and then the man driving
the flying machine said quite coolly: "I won't take you back." And then Turnbull said equally coolly: "Then I'll jump out of the
car." The unknown rose to his full height, and the expression in his
eyes seemed to be made of ironies behind ironies, as two mirrors
infinitely reflect each other. At last he said, very gravely: "Do
you think I am the devil?" "Yes," said Turnbull, violently. "For I think the devil is a
dream, and so are you. I don't believe in you or your flying ship
or your last fight of the world. It is all a nightmare. I say as
a fact of dogma and faith that it is all a nightmare. And I will
be a martyr for my faith as much as St. Catherine, for I will
jump out of this ship and risk waking up safe in bed." After swaying twice with the swaying vessel he dived over the
side as one dives into the sea. For some incredible moments stars
and space and planets seemed to shoot up past him as the sparks
fly upward; and yet in that sickening descent he was full of some
unnatural happiness. He could connect it with no idea except one
that half escaped him--what Evan had said of the difference
between Christ and Satan; that it was by Christ's own choice that
He descended into hell. When he again realized anything, he was lying on his elbow on the
lawn of the lunatic asylum, and the last red of the sunset had
not yet disappeared. XVII. THE IDIOT

Evan MacIan was standing a few yards off looking at him in
absolute silence. He had not the moral courage to ask MacIan if there had been
anything astounding in the manner of his coming there, nor did
MacIan seem to have any question to ask, or perhaps any need to
ask it. The two men came slowly towards each other, and found the
same expression on each other's faces. Then, for the first time
in all their acquaintance, they shook hands. Almost as if this were a kind of unconscious signal, it brought
Dr. Quayle bounding out of a door and running across the lawn. "Oh, there you are!" he exclaimed with a relieved giggle. "Will
you come inside, please? I want to speak to you both." They followed him into his shiny wooden office where their
damning record was kept. Dr. Quayle sat down on a swivel chair
and swung round to face them. His carved smile had suddenly
disappeared. "I will be plain with you gentlemen," he said, abruptly; "you
know quite well we do our best for everybody here. Your cases
have been under special consideration, and the Master himself has
decided that you ought to be treated specially and--er--under
somewhat simpler conditions."