That's all.' 'Thank you,' said Alice, 'it's very interesting. I never knew so much
about a whiting before.' 'I can tell you more than that, if you like,' said the Gryphon. 'Do you
know why it's called a whiting?' 'I never thought about it,' said Alice. 'Why?' 'IT DOES THE BOOTS AND SHOES.' the Gryphon replied very solemnly. Alice was thoroughly puzzled. 'Does the boots and shoes!' she repeated
in a wondering tone. 'Why, what are YOUR shoes done with?' said the Gryphon. 'I mean, what
makes them so shiny?' Alice looked down at them, and considered a little before she gave her
answer. 'They're done with blacking, I believe.' 'Boots and shoes under the sea,' the Gryphon went on in a deep voice,
'are done with a whiting. Now you know.' 'And what are they made of?' Alice asked in a tone of great curiosity. 'Soles and eels, of course,' the Gryphon replied rather impatiently:
'any shrimp could have told you that.' 'If I'd been the whiting,' said Alice, whose thoughts were still running
on the song, 'I'd have said to the porpoise, "Keep back, please: we
don't want YOU with us!"' 'They were obliged to have him with them,' the Mock Turtle said: 'no
wise fish would go anywhere without a porpoise.' 'Wouldn't it really?' said Alice in a tone of great surprise. 'Of course not,' said the Mock Turtle: 'why, if a fish came to ME, and
told me he was going a journey, I should say "With what porpoise?"' 'Don't you mean "purpose"?' said Alice. 'I mean what I say,' the Mock Turtle replied in an offended tone. And
the Gryphon added 'Come, let's hear some of YOUR adventures.' 'I could tell you my adventures--beginning from this morning,' said
Alice a little timidly: 'but it's no use going back to yesterday,
because I was a different person then.' 'Explain all that,' said the Mock Turtle. 'No, no! The adventures first,' said the Gryphon in an impatient tone:
'explanations take such a dreadful time.' So Alice began telling them her adventures from the time when she first
saw the White Rabbit. She was a little nervous about it just at first,
the two creatures got so close to her, one on each side, and opened
their eyes and mouths so VERY wide, but she gained courage as she went
on. Her listeners were perfectly quiet till she got to the part about
her repeating 'YOU ARE OLD, FATHER WILLIAM,' to the Caterpillar, and the
words all coming different, and then the Mock Turtle drew a long breath,
and said 'That's very curious.' 'It's all about as curious as it can be,' said the Gryphon. 'It all came different!' the Mock Turtle repeated thoughtfully. 'I
should like to hear her try and repeat something now. Tell her to
begin.' He looked at the Gryphon as if he thought it had some kind of
authority over Alice. 'Stand up and repeat "'TIS THE VOICE OF THE SLUGGARD,"' said the
Gryphon. 'How the creatures order one about, and make one repeat lessons!' thought Alice; 'I might as well be at school at once.' However, she
got up, and began to repeat it, but her head was so full of the Lobster
Quadrille, that she hardly knew what she was saying, and the words came
very queer indeed:--

  ''Tis the voice of the Lobster; I heard him declare,
  "You have baked me too brown, I must sugar my hair." As a duck with its eyelids, so he with his nose
  Trims his belt and his buttons, and turns out his toes.' [later editions continued as follows
  When the sands are all dry, he is gay as a lark,
  And will talk in contemptuous tones of the Shark,
  But, when the tide rises and sharks are around,
  His voice has a timid and tremulous sound.] 'That's different from what I used to say when I was a child,' said the
Gryphon. 'Well, I never heard it before,' said the Mock Turtle; 'but it sounds
uncommon nonsense.' Alice said nothing; she had sat down with her face in her hands,
wondering if anything would EVER happen in a natural way again. 'I should like to have it explained,' said the Mock Turtle. 'She can't explain it,' said the Gryphon hastily. 'Go on with the next
verse.' 'But about his toes?' the Mock Turtle persisted. 'How COULD he turn them
out with his nose, you know?' 'It's the first position in dancing.' Alice said; but was dreadfully
puzzled by the whole thing, and longed to change the subject. 'Go on with the next verse,' the Gryphon repeated impatiently: 'it
begins "I passed by his garden."' Alice did not dare to disobey, though she felt sure it would all come
wrong, and she went on in a trembling voice:--

  'I passed by his garden, and marked, with one eye,
  How the Owl and the Panther were sharing a pie--'

    [later editions continued as follows
  The Panther took pie-crust, and gravy, and meat,
  While the Owl had the dish as its share of the treat. When the pie was all finished, the Owl, as a boon,
  Was kindly permitted to pocket the spoon:
  While the Panther received knife and fork with a growl,
  And concluded the banquet--]

'What IS the use of repeating all that stuff,' the Mock Turtle
interrupted, 'if you don't explain it as you go on? It's by far the most
confusing thing I ever heard!' 'Yes, I think you'd better leave off,' said the Gryphon: and Alice was
only too glad to do so. 'Shall we try another figure of the Lobster Quadrille?' the Gryphon went
on. 'Or would you like the Mock Turtle to sing you a song?' 'Oh, a song, please, if the Mock Turtle would be so kind,' Alice
replied, so eagerly that the Gryphon said, in a rather offended tone,
'Hm! No accounting for tastes! Sing her "Turtle Soup," will you, old
fellow?' The Mock Turtle sighed deeply, and began, in a voice sometimes choked
with sobs, to sing this:--

   'Beautiful Soup, so rich and green,
   Waiting in a hot tureen! Who for such dainties would not stoop? Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! Soup of the evening, beautiful Soup! Beau--ootiful Soo--oop! Beau--ootiful Soo--oop! Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup! 'Beautiful Soup! Who cares for fish,
   Game, or any other dish? Who would not give all else for two
   Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup? Pennyworth only of beautiful Soup? Beau--ootiful Soo--oop! Beau--ootiful Soo--oop! Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beauti--FUL SOUP!' 'Chorus again!' cried the Gryphon, and the Mock Turtle had just begun
to repeat it, when a cry of 'The trial's beginning!' was heard in the
distance. 'Come on!' cried the Gryphon, and, taking Alice by the hand, it hurried
off, without waiting for the end of the song. 'What trial is it?' Alice panted as she ran; but the Gryphon only
answered 'Come on!' and ran the faster, while more and more faintly
came, carried on the breeze that followed them, the melancholy words:--

   'Soo--oop of the e--e--evening,
     Beautiful, beautiful Soup!' CHAPTER XI. Who Stole the Tarts? The King and Queen of Hearts were seated on their throne when they
arrived, with a great crowd assembled about them--all sorts of little
birds and beasts, as well as the whole pack of cards: the Knave was
standing before them, in chains, with a soldier on each side to guard
him; and near the King was the White Rabbit, with a trumpet in one hand,
and a scroll of parchment in the other. In the very middle of the court
was a table, with a large dish of tarts upon it: they looked so good,
that it made Alice quite hungry to look at them--'I wish they'd get the
trial done,' she thought, 'and hand round the refreshments!' But there
seemed to be no chance of this, so she began looking at everything about
her, to pass away the time. Alice had never been in a court of justice before, but she had read
about them in books, and she was quite pleased to find that she knew
the name of nearly everything there.