weep! weep!" So your chimneys I sweep, and in soot I sleep. There's little Tom Dacre, who cried when his head,
 That curled like a lamb's back, was shaved; so I said,
 "Hush, Tom! never mind it, for, when your head's bare,
 You know that the soot cannot spoil your white hair." And so he was quiet, and that very night,
 As Tom was a-sleeping, he had such a sight! --
 That thousands of sweepers, Dick, Joe, Ned, and Jack,
 Were all of them locked up in coffins of black. And by came an angel, who had a bright key,
 And he opened the coffins, and let them all free;
 Then down a green plain, leaping, laughing, they run,
 And wash in a river, and shine in the sun. Then naked and white, all their bags left behind,
 They rise upon clouds, and sport in the wind;
 And the Angel told Tom, if he'd be a good boy,
 He'd have God for his father, and never want joy. And so Tom awoke, and we rose in the dark,
 And got with our bags and our brushes to work. Though the morning was cold, Tom was happy and warm:
 So, if all do their duty, they need not fear harm. THE LITTLE BOY LOST
 
 "Father, father, where are you going? Oh do not walk so fast! Speak, father, speak to you little boy,
   Or else I shall be lost." The night was dark, no father was there,
   The child was wet with dew;
 The mire was deep, and the child did weep,
   And away the vapour flew. THE LITTLE BOY FOUND
 
 The little boy lost in the lonely fen,
   Led by the wandering light,
 Began to cry, but God, ever nigh,
   Appeared like his father, in white. He kissed the child, and by the hand led,
   And to his mother brought,
 Who in sorrow pale, through the lonely dale,
   The little boy weeping sought. LAUGHING SONG
 
 When the green woods laugh with the voice of joy,
 And the dimpling stream runs laughing by;
 When the air does laugh with our merry wit,
 And the green hill laughs with the noise of it;
 
 when the meadows laugh with lively green,
 And the grasshopper laughs in the merry scene,
 When Mary and Susan and Emily
 With their sweet round mouths sing "Ha, ha he!" When the painted birds laugh in the shade,
 Where our table with cherries and nuts is spread:
 Come live, and be merry, and join with me,
 To sing the sweet chorus of "Ha, ha, he!" A  SONG
 
 Sweet dreams, form a shade
 O'er my lovely infant's head! Sweet dreams of pleasant streams
 By happy, silent, moony beams! Sweet Sleep, with soft down
 Weave thy brows an infant crown
 Sweet Sleep, angel mild,
 Hover o'er my happy child! Sweet smiles, in the night
 Hover over my delight! Sweet smiles, mother's smile,
 All the livelong night beguile. Sweet moans, dovelike sighs,
 Chase not slumber from thine eyes! Sweet moan, sweeter smile,
 All the dovelike moans beguile. Sleep, sleep, happy child! All creation slept and smiled. Sleep, sleep, happy sleep,
 While o'er thee doth mother weep. Sweet babe, in thy face
 Holy image I can trace;
 Sweet babe, once like thee
 Thy Maker lay, and wept for me:
 
 Wept for me, for thee, for all,
 When He was an infant small. Thou His image ever see,
 Heavenly face that smiles on thee! Smiles on thee, on me, on all,
 Who became an infant small;
 Infant smiles are his own smiles;
 Heaven and earth to peace beguiles. DIVINE IMAGE
 
 To Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
   All pray in their distress,
 And to these virtues of delight
   Return their thankfulness. For Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
   Is God our Father dear;
 And Mercy, Pity, Peace, and Love,
   Is man, his child and care. For Mercy has a human heart
   Pity, a human face;
 And Love, the human form divine;
   And Peace, the human dress. Then every man, of every clime,
   That prays in his distress,
 Prays to the human form divine:
   Love, Mercy, Pity, Peace. And all must love the human form,
   In heathen, Turk, or Jew. Where Mercy, Love, and Pity dwell,
   There God is dwelling too. HOLY THURSDAY
 
 'Twas on a Holy Thursday, their innocent faces clean,
 Came children walking two and two, in read, and blue, and green:
 Grey-headed beadles walked before, with wands as white as snow,
 Till into the high dome of Paul's they like Thames waters flow. Oh what a multitude they seemed, these flowers of London town! Seated in companies they sit, with radiance all their own. The hum of multitudes was there, but multitudes of lambs,
 Thousands of little boys and girls raising their innocent hands. Now like a mighty wild they raise to heaven the voice of song,
 Or like harmonious thunderings the seats of heaven among:
 Beneath them sit the aged man, wise guardians of the poor. Then cherish pity, lest you drive an angel from your door. NIGHT
 
 The sun descending in the west,
 The evening star does shine;
 The birds are silent in their nest,
 And I must seek for mine. The moon, like a flower
   In heaven's high bower,
   With silent delight,
   Sits and smiles on the night. Farewell, green fields and happy grove,
 Where flocks have ta'en delight. Where lambs have nibbled, silent move
 The feet of angels bright;
   Unseen they pour blessing,
   And joy without ceasing,
   On each bud and blossom,
   And each sleeping bosom. They look in every thoughtless nest
 Where birds are covered warm;
 They visit caves of every beast,
 To keep them all from harm:
   If they see any weeping
   That should have been sleeping,
   They pour sleep on their head,
   And sit down by their bed. When wolves and tigers howl for prey,
 They pitying stand and weep;
 Seeking to drive their thirst away,
 And keep them from the sheep. But, if they rush dreadful,
   The angels, most heedful,
   Receive each mild spirit,
   New worlds to inherit. And there the lion's ruddy eyes
 Shall flow with tears of gold:
 And pitying the tender cries,
 And walking round the fold:
   Saying: "Wrath by His meekness,
   And, by His health, sickness,
   Are driven away
   From our immortal day. "And now beside thee, bleating lamb,
 I can lie down and sleep,
 Or think on Him who bore thy name,
 Graze after thee, and weep. For, washed in life's river,
   My bright mane for ever
   Shall shine like the gold,
   As I guard o'er the fold." SPRING
 
      Sound the flute! Now it's mute! Bird's delight,
      Day and night,
      Nightingale,
      In the dale,
      Lark in sky,--
      Merrily,
 Merrily merrily, to welcome in the year. Little boy,
      Full of joy;
      Little girl,
      Sweet and small;
      Cock does crow,
      So do you;
      Merry voice,
      Infant noise;
 Merrily, merrily, to welcome in the year. Little lamb,
      Here I am;
      Come and lick
      My white neck;
      Let me pull
      Your soft wool;
      Let me kiss
      Your soft face;
 Merrily, merrily, to welcome in the year. NURSE'S SONG
 
 When the voices of children are heard on the green,
   And laughing is heard on the hill,
 My heart is at rest within my breast,
   And everything else is still. "Then come home, my children, the sun is gone down,
   And the dews of night arise;
 Come, come, leave off play, and let us away,
   Till the morning appears in the skies." "No, no, let us play, for it is yet day,
   And we cannot go to sleep;
 Besides, in the sky the little birds fly,
   And the hills are all covered with sheep." "Well, well, go and play till the light fades away,
   And then go home to bed." The little ones leaped, and shouted, and laughed,
   And all the hills echoed. INFANT JOY
 
 "I have no name;
 I am but two days old." What shall I call thee? "I happy am,
 Joy is my name." Sweet joy befall thee! Pretty joy! Sweet joy, but two days old. Sweet Joy I call thee:
 Thou dost smile,
 I sing the while;
 Sweet joy befall thee! A DREAM
 
 Once a dream did weave a shade
 O'er my angel-guarded bed,
 That an emmet lost its way
 Where on grass methought I lay. Troubled, wildered, and forlorn,
 Dark, benighted, travel-worn,
 Over many a tangle spray,
 All heart-broke, I heard her say:
 
 "Oh my children! do they cry,
 Do they hear their father sigh? Now they look abroad to see,
 Now return and weep for me." Pitying, I dropped a tear:
 But I saw a glow-worm near,
 Who replied, "What wailing wight
 Calls the watchman of the night? "I am set to light the ground,
 While the beetle goes his round:
 Follow now the beetle's hum;
 Little wanderer, hie thee home!" ON ANOTHER'S SORROW
 
 Can I see another's woe,
 And not be in sorrow too? Can I see another's grief,
 And not seek for kind relief? Can I see a falling tear,
 And not feel my sorrow's share? Can a father see his child
 Weep, nor be with sorrow filled? Can a mother sit and hear
 An infant groan, an infant fear? No, no! never can it be! Never, never can it be! And can He who smiles on all
 Hear the wren with sorrows small,
 Hear the small bird's grief and care,
 Hear the woes that infants bear --
 
 And not sit beside the next,
 Pouring pity in their breast,
 And not sit the cradle near,
 Weeping tear on infant's tear? And not sit both night and day,
 Wiping all our tears away? Oh no! never can it be! Never, never can it be! He doth give his joy to all:
 He becomes an infant small,
 He becomes a man of woe,
 He doth feel the sorrow too. Think not thou canst sigh a sigh,
 And thy Maker is not by:
 Think not thou canst weep a tear,
 And thy Maker is not year. Oh He gives to us his joy,
 That our grief He may destroy:
 Till our grief is fled an gone
 He doth sit by us and moan. SONGS OF EXPERIENCE
 
 
 INTRODUCTION
 
 Hear the voice of the Bard,
 Who present, past, and future, sees;
 Whose ears have heard
 The Holy Word
 That walked among the ancient tree;
 
 Calling the lapsed soul,
 And weeping in the evening dew;
 That might control
 The starry pole,
 And fallen, fallen light renew! "O Earth, O Earth, return! Arise from out the dewy grass! Night is worn,
 And the morn
 Rises from the slumbrous mass. "Turn away no more;
 Why wilt thou turn away? The starry floor,
 The watery shore,
 Are given thee till the break of day." EARTH'S ANSWER
 
 Earth raised up her head
 From the darkness dread and drear,
 Her light fled,
 Stony, dread,
 And her locks covered with grey despair.