2:10 Esther had not shewed her people nor her kindred: for Mordecai
had charged her that she should not shew it. 2:11 And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's
house, to know how Esther did, and what should become of her. 2:12 Now when every maid's turn was come to go in to king Ahasuerus,
after that she had been twelve months, according to the manner of the
women, (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, to
wit, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odours,
and with other things for the purifying of the women;) 2:13 Then thus
came every maiden unto the king; whatsoever she desired was given her
to go with her out of the house of the women unto the king's house. 2:14 In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the
second house of the women, to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king's
chamberlain, which kept the concubines: she came in unto the king no
more, except the king delighted in her, and that she were called by
name. 2:15 Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of
Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, was come to go in unto
the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain,
the keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained favour in the
sight of all them that looked upon her. 2:16 So Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house royal in
the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his
reign. 2:17 And the king loved Esther above all the women, and she obtained
grace and favour in his sight more than all the virgins; so that he
set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of
Vashti. 2:18 Then the king made a great feast unto all his princes and his
servants, even Esther's feast; and he made a release to the provinces,
and gave gifts, according to the state of the king. 2:19 And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then
Mordecai sat in the king's gate. 2:20 Esther had not yet shewed her kindred nor her people; as Mordecai
had charged her: for Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, like as
when she was brought up with him. 2:21 In those days, while Mordecai sat in the king's gate, two of the
king's chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those which kept the door,
were wroth, and sought to lay hands on the king Ahasuerus. 2:22 And the thing was known to Mordecai, who told it unto Esther the
queen; and Esther certified the king thereof in Mordecai's name. 2:23 And when inquisition was made of the matter, it was found out;
therefore they were both hanged on a tree: and it was written in the
book of the chronicles before the king. 3:1 After these things did king Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of
Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all
the princes that were with him. 3:2 And all the king's servants, that were in the king's gate, bowed,
and reverenced Haman: for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence. 3:3 Then the king's servants, which were in the king's gate, said unto
Mordecai, Why transgressest thou the king's commandment? 3:4 Now it
came to pass, when they spake daily unto him, and he hearkened not
unto them, that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai's matters
would stand: for he had told them that he was a Jew. 3:5 And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence,
then was Haman full of wrath. 3:6 And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone; for they had
shewed him the people of Mordecai: wherefore Haman sought to destroy
all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even
the people of Mordecai. 3:7 In the first month, that is, the month Nisan, in the twelfth year
of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman from
day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is,
the month Adar. 3:8 And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people
scattered abroad and dispersed among the people in all the provinces
of thy kingdom; and their laws are diverse from all people; neither
keep they the king's laws: therefore it is not for the king's profit
to suffer them. 3:9 If it please the king, let it be written that they may be
destroyed: and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands
of those that have the charge of the business, to bring it into the
king's treasuries. 3:10 And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman
the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy. 3:11 And the king said unto Haman, The silver is given to thee, the
people also, to do with them as it seemeth good to thee. 3:12 Then were the king's scribes called on the thirteenth day of the
first month, and there was written according to all that Haman had
commanded unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors that were
over every province, and to the rulers of every people of every
province according to the writing thereof, and to every people after
their language; in the name of king Ahasuerus was it written, and
sealed with the king's ring. 3:13 And the letters were sent by posts into all the king's provinces,
to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and
old, little children and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth
day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to take the
spoil of them for a prey. 3:14 The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
province was published unto all people, that they should be ready
against that day. 3:15 The posts went out, being hastened by the king's commandment, and
the decree was given in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat
down to drink; but the city Shushan was perplexed. 4:1 When Mordecai perceived all that was done, Mordecai rent his
clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst
of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry; 4:2 And came even
before the king's gate: for none might enter into the king's gate
clothed with sackcloth. 4:3 And in every province, whithersoever the king's commandment and
his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting,
and weeping, and wailing; and many lay in sackcloth and ashes. 4:4 So Esther's maids and her chamberlains came and told it her. Then
was the queen exceedingly grieved; and she sent raiment to clothe
Mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth from him: but he received it
not. 4:5 Then called Esther for Hatach, one of the king's chamberlains,
whom he had appointed to attend upon her, and gave him a commandment
to Mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was. 4:6 So Hatach went forth to Mordecai unto the street of the city,
which was before the king's gate. 4:7 And Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him, and of
the sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's
treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them. 4:8 Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was
given at Shushan to destroy them, to shew it unto Esther, and to
declare it unto her, and to charge her that she should go in unto the
king, to make supplication unto him, and to make request before him
for her people. 4:9 And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai. 4:10 Again Esther spake unto Hatach, and gave him commandment unto
Mordecai; 4:11 All the king's servants, and the people of the king's
provinces, do know, that whosoever, whether man or women, shall come
unto the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is one
law of his to put him to death, except such to whom the king shall
hold out the golden sceptre, that he may live: but I have not been
called to come in unto the king these thirty days. 4:12 And they told to Mordecai Esther's words. 4:13 Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther, Think not with thyself
that thou shalt escape in the king's house, more than all the Jews. 4:14 For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time, then shall
there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from another
place; but thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed: and who
knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as this? 4:15 Then Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer, 4:16 Go,
gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye
for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day: I also and
my maidens will fast likewise; and so will I go in unto the king,
which is not according to the law: and if I perish, I perish. 4:17 So Mordecai went his way, and did according to all that Esther
had commanded him. 5:1 Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her royal
apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house, over
against the king's house: and the king sat upon his royal throne in
the royal house, over against the gate of the house. 5:2 And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in the
court, that she obtained favour in his sight: and the king held out to
Esther the golden sceptre that was in his hand. So Esther drew near,
and touched the top of the sceptre. 5:3 Then said the king unto her, What wilt thou, queen Esther? and
what is thy request? it shall be even given thee to the half of the
kingdom. 5:4 And Esther answered, If it seem good unto the king, let the king
and Haman come this day unto the banquet that I have prepared for him. 5:5 Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste, that he may do as
Esther hath said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that
Esther had prepared. 5:6 And the king said unto Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy
petition? and it shall be granted thee: and what is thy request? even
to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed. 5:7 Then answered Esther, and said, My petition and my request is; 5:8
If I have found favour in the sight of the king, and if it please the
king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and
Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and I will do
to morrow as the king hath said. 5:9 Then went Haman forth that day joyful and with a glad heart: but
when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he stood not up, nor
moved for him, he was full of indignation against Mordecai. 5:10 Nevertheless Haman refrained himself: and when he came home, he
sent and called for his friends, and Zeresh his wife. 5:11 And Haman told them of the glory of his riches, and the multitude
of his children, and all the things wherein the king had promoted him,
and how he had advanced him above the princes and servants of the
king. 5:12 Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the queen did let no man come in
with the king unto the banquet that she had prepared but myself; and
to morrow am I invited unto her also with the king. 5:13 Yet all this availeth me nothing, so long as I see Mordecai the
Jew sitting at the king's gate. 5:14 Then said Zeresh his wife and all his friends unto him, Let a
gallows be made of fifty cubits high, and to morrow speak thou unto
the king that Mordecai may be hanged thereon: then go thou in merrily
with the king unto the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman; and he
caused the gallows to be made. 6:1 On that night could not the king sleep, and he commanded to bring
the book of records of the chronicles; and they were read before the
king. 6:2 And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and
Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who
sought to lay hand on the king Ahasuerus. 6:3 And the king said, What honour and dignity hath been done to
Mordecai for this? Then said the king's servants that ministered unto
him, There is nothing done for him. 6:4 And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman was come into
the outward court of the king's house, to speak unto the king to hang
Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him. 6:5 And the king's servants said unto him, Behold, Haman standeth in
the court. And the king said, Let him come in. 6:6 So Haman came in. And the king said unto him, What shall be done
unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? Now Haman thought in
his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honour more than to
myself? 6:7 And Haman answered the king, For the man whom the king
delighteth to honour, 6:8 Let the royal apparel be brought which the
king useth to wear, and the horse that the king rideth upon, and the
crown royal which is set upon his head: 6:9 And let this apparel and
horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble
princes, that they may array the man withal whom the king delighteth
to honour, and bring him on horseback through the street of the city,
and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the
king delighteth to honour. 6:10 Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and take the apparel and
the horse, as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that
sitteth at the king's gate: let nothing fail of all that thou hast
spoken. 6:11 Then took Haman the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai,
and brought him on horseback through the street of the city, and
proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the
king delighteth to honour. 6:12 And Mordecai came again to the king's gate. But Haman hasted to
his house mourning, and having his head covered. 6:13 And Haman told Zeresh his wife and all his friends every thing
that had befallen him. Then said his wise men and Zeresh his wife unto
him, If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou hast
begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely
fall before him. 6:14 And while they were yet talking with him, came the king's
chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet that Esther
had prepared. 7:1 So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen. 7:2 And the king said again unto Esther on the second day at the
banquet of wine, What is thy petition, queen Esther? and it shall be
granted thee: and what is thy request? and it shall be performed, even
to the half of the kingdom. 7:3 Then Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found favour in
thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me
at my petition, and my people at my request: 7:4 For we are sold, I
and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we
had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue,
although the enemy could not countervail the king's damage. 7:5 Then the king Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the queen,
Who is he, and where is he, that durst presume in his heart to do so? 7:6 And Esther said, The adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen. 7:7 And the king arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath went
into the palace garden: and Haman stood up to make request for his
life to Esther the queen; for he saw that there was evil determined
against him by the king. 7:8 Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of
the banquet of wine; and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon Esther
was. Then said the king, Will he force the queen also before me in the
house? As the word went out of king's mouth, they covered Haman's
face. 7:9 And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king,
Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for
Mordecai, who spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of
Haman. Then the king said, Hang him thereon. 7:10 So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for
Mordecai. Then was the king's wrath pacified. 8:1 On that day did the king Ahasuerus give the house of Haman the
Jews' enemy unto Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king;
for Esther had told what he was unto her. 8:2 And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and
gave it unto Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of
Haman. 8:3 And Esther spake yet again before the king, and fell down at his
feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman
the Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews. 8:4 Then the king held out the golden sceptre toward Esther. So Esther
arose, and stood before the king, 8:5 And said, If it please the king,
and if I have favour in his sight, and the thing seem right before the
king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the
letters devised by Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he
wrote to destroy the Jews which are in all the king's provinces: 8:6
For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred? 8:7 Then
the king Ahasuerus said unto Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew,
Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have
hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews. 8:8 Write ye also for the Jews, as it liketh you, in the king's name,
and seal it with the king's ring: for the writing which is written in
the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse. 8:9 Then were the king's scribes called at that time in the third
month, that is, the month Sivan, on the three and twentieth day
thereof; and it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded
unto the Jews, and to the lieutenants, and the deputies and rulers of
the provinces which are from India unto Ethiopia, an hundred twenty
and seven provinces, unto every province according to the writing
thereof, and unto every people after their language, and to the Jews
according to their writing, and according to their language. 8:10 And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus' name, and sealed it with the
king's ring, and sent letters by posts on horseback, and riders on
mules, camels, and young dromedaries: 8:11 Wherein the king granted
the Jews which were in every city to gather themselves together, and
to stand for their life, to destroy, to slay and to cause to perish,
all the power of the people and province that would assault them, both
little ones and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey, 8:12
Upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar. 8:13 The copy of the writing for a commandment to be given in every
province was published unto all people, and that the Jews should be
ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies. 8:14 So the posts that rode upon mules and camels went out, being
hastened and pressed on by the king's commandment. And the decree was
given at Shushan the palace. 8:15 And Mordecai went out from the presence of the king in royal
apparel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a
garment of fine linen and purple: and the city of Shushan rejoiced and
was glad. 8:16 The Jews had light, and gladness, and joy, and honour. 8:17 And in every province, and in every city, whithersoever the
king's commandment and his decree came, the Jews had joy and gladness,
a feast and a good day. And many of the people of the land became
Jews; for the fear of the Jews fell upon them. 9:1 Now in the twelfth month, that is, the month Adar, on the
thirteenth day of the same, when the king's commandment and his decree
drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of the
Jews hoped to have power over them, (though it was turned to the
contrary, that the Jews had rule over them that hated them;) 9:2 The
Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the
provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their
hurt: and no man could withstand them; for the fear of them fell upon
all people. 9:3 And all the rulers of the provinces, and the lieutenants, and the
deputies, and officers of the king, helped the Jews; because the fear
of Mordecai fell upon them. 9:4 For Mordecai was great in the king's house, and his fame went out
throughout all the provinces: for this man Mordecai waxed greater and
greater. 9:5 Thus the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the
sword, and slaughter, and destruction, and did what they would unto
those that hated them. 9:6 And in Shushan the palace the Jews slew and destroyed five hundred
men. 9:7 And Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha, 9:8 And Poratha, and
Adalia, and Aridatha, 9:9 And Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and
Vajezatha, 9:10 The ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the enemy
of the Jews, slew they; but on the spoil laid they not their hand. 9:11 On that day the number of those that were slain in Shushan the
palace was brought before the king. 9:12 And the king said unto Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and
destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of
Haman; what have they done in the rest of the king's provinces? now
what is thy petition? and it shall be granted thee: or what is thy
request further? and it shall be done. 9:13 Then said Esther, If it please the king, let it be granted to the
Jews which are in Shushan to do to morrow also according unto this
day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows. 9:14 And the king commanded it so to be done: and the decree was given
at Shushan; and they hanged Haman's ten sons. 9:15 For the Jews that were in Shushan gathered themselves together on
the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and slew three hundred men
at Shushan; but on the prey they laid not their hand. 9:16 But the other Jews that were in the king's provinces gathered
themselves together, and stood for their lives, and had rest from
their enemies, and slew of their foes seventy and five thousand, but
they laid not their hands on the prey, 9:17 On the thirteenth day of
the month Adar; and on the fourteenth day of the same rested they, and
made it a day of feasting and gladness. 9:18 But the Jews that were at Shushan assembled together on the
thirteenth day thereof, and on the fourteenth thereof; and on the
fifteenth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting
and gladness. 9:19 Therefore the Jews of the villages, that dwelt in the unwalled
towns, made the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of gladness and
feasting, and a good day, and of sending portions one to another. 9:20 And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters unto all the
Jews that were in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, both nigh
and far, 9:21 To stablish this among them, that they should keep the
fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same,
yearly, 9:22 As the days wherein the Jews rested from their enemies,
and the month which was turned unto them from sorrow to joy, and from
mourning into a good day: that they should make them days of feasting
and joy, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the
poor. 9:23 And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai
had written unto them; 9:24 Because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the
Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had devised against the Jews to
destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is, the lot, to consume them, and
to destroy them; 9:25 But when Esther came before the king, he
commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he devised against
the Jews, should return upon his own head, and that he and his sons
should be hanged on the gallows. 9:26 Wherefore they called these days Purim after the name of Pur. Therefore for all the words of this letter, and of that which they had
seen concerning this matter, and which had come unto them, 9:27 The
Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all
such as joined themselves unto them, so as it should not fail, that
they would keep these two days according to their writing, and
according to their appointed time every year; 9:28 And that these days
should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every
family, every province, and every city; and that these days of Purim
should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorial of them perish
from their seed. 9:29 Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the
Jew, wrote with all authority, to confirm this second letter of Purim. 9:30 And he sent the letters unto all the Jews, to the hundred twenty
and seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace
and truth, 9:31 To confirm these days of Purim in their times
appointed, according as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had
enjoined them, and as they had decreed for themselves and for their
seed, the matters of the fastings and their cry. 9:32 And the decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim; and it
was written in the book. 10:1 And the king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the
isles of the sea. 10:2 And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the
declaration of the greatness of Mordecai, whereunto the king advanced
him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Media and Persia? 10:3 For Mordecai the Jew was next unto king
Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of
his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to
all his seed. The Book of Job


1:1 There was a man in the land of Uz, whose name was Job; and that
man was perfect and upright, and one that feared God, and eschewed evil. 1:2 And there were born unto him seven sons and three daughters. 1:3 His substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand
camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she asses, and
a very great household; so that this man was the greatest of all the
men of the east. 1:4 And his sons went and feasted in their houses, every one his day;
and sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with
them. 1:5 And it was so, when the days of their feasting were gone about,
that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning,
and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for
Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and cursed God in their
hearts. Thus did Job continually. 1:6 Now there was a day when the sons of God came to present
themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them. 1:7 And the LORD said unto Satan, Whence comest thou? Then Satan
answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it. 1:8 And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? 1:9 Then Satan
answered the LORD, and said, Doth Job fear God for nought? 1:10 Hast
not thou made an hedge about him, and about his house, and about all
that he hath on every side? thou hast blessed the work of his hands,
and his substance is increased in the land. 1:11 But put forth thine hand now, and touch all that he hath, and he
will curse thee to thy face. 1:12 And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, all that he hath is in thy
power; only upon himself put not forth thine hand. So Satan went forth
from the presence of the LORD. 1:13 And there was a day when his sons and his daughters were eating
and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house: 1:14 And there came
a messenger unto Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and the asses
feeding beside them: 1:15 And the Sabeans fell upon them, and took
them away; yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the
sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 1:16 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The
fire of God is fallen from heaven, and hath burned up the sheep, and
the servants, and consumed them; and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee. 1:17 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The
Chaldeans made out three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have
carried them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the
sword; and I only am escaped alone to tell thee. 1:18 While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy
sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest
brother's house: 1:19 And, behold, there came a great wind from the
wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon
the young men, and they are dead; and I only am escaped alone to tell
thee. 1:20 Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head, and
fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, 1:21 And said, Naked came I
out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither: the LORD
gave, and the LORD hath taken away; blessed be the name of the LORD. 1:22 In all this Job sinned not, nor charged God foolishly. 2:1 Again there was a day when the sons of God came to present
themselves before the LORD, and Satan came also among them to present
himself before the LORD. 2:2 And the LORD said unto Satan, From whence comest thou? And Satan
answered the LORD, and said, From going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it. 2:3 And the LORD said unto Satan, Hast thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright
man, one that feareth God, and escheweth evil? and still he holdeth
fast his integrity, although thou movedst me against him, to destroy
him without cause. 2:4 And Satan answered the LORD, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all
that a man hath will he give for his life. 2:5 But put forth thine hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh,
and he will curse thee to thy face. 2:6 And the LORD said unto Satan, Behold, he is in thine hand; but
save his life. 2:7 So went Satan forth from the presence of the LORD, and smote Job
with sore boils from the sole of his foot unto his crown. 2:8 And he took him a potsherd to scrape himself withal; and he sat
down among the ashes. 2:9 Then said his wife unto him, Dost thou still retain thine
integrity? curse God, and die. 2:10 But he said unto her, Thou speakest as one of the foolish women
speaketh. What? shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we
not receive evil? In all this did not Job sin with his lips. 2:11 Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that was come
upon him, they came every one from his own place; Eliphaz the
Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite: for they
had made an appointment together to come to mourn with him and to
comfort him. 2:12 And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and knew him not,
they lifted up their voice, and wept; and they rent every one his
mantle, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven. 2:13 So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven
nights, and none spake a word unto him: for they saw that his grief
was very great. 3:1 After this opened Job his mouth, and cursed his day. 3:2 And Job spake, and said, 3:3 Let the day perish wherein I was
born, and the night in which it was said, There is a man child
conceived. 3:4 Let that day be darkness; let not God regard it from above,
neither let the light shine upon it. 3:5 Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it; let a cloud dwell
upon it; let the blackness of the day terrify it. 3:6 As for that night, let darkness seize upon it; let it not be
joined unto the days of the year, let it not come into the number of
the months. 3:7 Lo, let that night be solitary, let no joyful voice come therein. 3:8 Let them curse it that curse the day, who are ready to raise up
their mourning. 3:9 Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark; let it look for
light, but have none; neither let it see the dawning of the day: 3:10
Because it shut not up the doors of my mother's womb, nor hid sorrow
from mine eyes. 3:11 Why died I not from the womb? why did I not give up the ghost
when I came out of the belly? 3:12 Why did the knees prevent me? or
why the breasts that I should suck? 3:13 For now should I have lain
still and been quiet, I should have slept: then had I been at rest,
3:14 With kings and counsellors of the earth, which build desolate
places for themselves; 3:15 Or with princes that had gold, who filled
their houses with silver: 3:16 Or as an hidden untimely birth I had
not been; as infants which never saw light. 3:17 There the wicked cease from troubling; and there the weary be at
rest. 3:18 There the prisoners rest together; they hear not the voice of the
oppressor. 3:19 The small and great are there; and the servant is free from his
master. 3:20 Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery, and life unto
the bitter in soul; 3:21 Which long for death, but it cometh not; and
dig for it more than for hid treasures; 3:22 Which rejoice
exceedingly, and are glad, when they can find the grave? 3:23 Why is
light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God hath hedged in? 3:24 For my sighing cometh before I eat, and my roarings are poured
out like the waters. 3:25 For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, and that
which I was afraid of is come unto me. 3:26 I was not in safety, neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; yet
trouble came. 4:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and said, 4:2 If we assay to
commune with thee, wilt thou be grieved? but who can withhold himself
from speaking? 4:3 Behold, thou hast instructed many, and thou hast
strengthened the weak hands. 4:4 Thy words have upholden him that was falling, and thou hast
strengthened the feeble knees. 4:5 But now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest; it toucheth thee,
and thou art troubled. 4:6 Is not this thy fear, thy confidence, thy hope, and the
uprightness of thy ways? 4:7 Remember, I pray thee, who ever
perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous cut off? 4:8
Even as I have seen, they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, reap
the same. 4:9 By the blast of God they perish, and by the breath of his nostrils
are they consumed. 4:10 The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and
the teeth of the young lions, are broken. 4:11 The old lion perisheth for lack of prey, and the stout lion's
whelps are scattered abroad. 4:12 Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and mine ear received a
little thereof. 4:13 In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep
falleth on men, 4:14 Fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all
my bones to shake. 4:15 Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood
up: 4:16 It stood still, but I could not discern the form thereof: an
image was before mine eyes, there was silence, and I heard a voice,
saying, 4:17 Shall mortal man be more just than God? shall a man be
more pure than his maker? 4:18 Behold, he put no trust in his
servants; and his angels he charged with folly: 4:19 How much less in
them that dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust,
which are crushed before the moth? 4:20 They are destroyed from
morning to evening: they perish for ever without any regarding it. 4:21 Doth not their excellency which is in them go away? they die,
even without wisdom. 5:1 Call now, if there be any that will answer thee; and to which of
the saints wilt thou turn? 5:2 For wrath killeth the foolish man, and
envy slayeth the silly one. 5:3 I have seen the foolish taking root: but suddenly I cursed his
habitation. 5:4 His children are far from safety, and they are crushed in the
gate, neither is there any to deliver them. 5:5 Whose harvest the hungry eateth up, and taketh it even out of the
thorns, and the robber swalloweth up their substance. 5:6 Although affliction cometh not forth of the dust, neither doth
trouble spring out of the ground; 5:7 Yet man is born unto trouble, as
the sparks fly upward. 5:8 I would seek unto God, and unto God would I commit my cause: 5:9
Which doeth great things and unsearchable; marvellous things without
number: 5:10 Who giveth rain upon the earth, and sendeth waters upon
the fields: 5:11 To set up on high those that be low; that those which
mourn may be exalted to safety. 5:12 He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands
cannot perform their enterprise. 5:13 He taketh the wise in their own craftiness: and the counsel of
the froward is carried headlong. 5:14 They meet with darkness in the day time, and grope in the noonday
as in the night. 5:15 But he saveth the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from
the hand of the mighty. 5:16 So the poor hath hope, and iniquity stoppeth her mouth. 5:17 Behold, happy is the man whom God correcteth: therefore despise
not thou the chastening of the Almighty: 5:18 For he maketh sore, and
bindeth up: he woundeth, and his hands make whole. 5:19 He shall deliver thee in six troubles: yea, in seven there shall
no evil touch thee. 5:20 In famine he shall redeem thee from death: and in war from the
power of the sword. 5:21 Thou shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue: neither shalt
thou be afraid of destruction when it cometh. 5:22 At destruction and famine thou shalt laugh: neither shalt thou be
afraid of the beasts of the earth. 5:23 For thou shalt be in league with the stones of the field: and the
beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee. 5:24 And thou shalt know that thy tabernacle shall be in peace; and
thou shalt visit thy habitation, and shalt not sin. 5:25 Thou shalt know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine
offspring as the grass of the earth. 5:26 Thou shalt come to thy grave in a full age, like as a shock of
corn cometh in in his season. 5:27 Lo this, we have searched it, so it is; hear it, and know thou it
for thy good. 6:1 But Job answered and said, 6:2 Oh that my grief were throughly
weighed, and my calamity laid in the balances together! 6:3 For now
it would be heavier than the sand of the sea: therefore my words are
swallowed up. 6:4 For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison whereof
drinketh up my spirit: the terrors of God do set themselves in array
against me. 6:5 Doth the wild ass bray when he hath grass? or loweth the ox over
his fodder? 6:6 Can that which is unsavoury be eaten without salt? or
is there any taste in the white of an egg? 6:7 The things that my
soul refused to touch are as my sorrowful meat. 6:8 Oh that I might have my request; and that God would grant me the
thing that I long for! 6:9 Even that it would please God to destroy
me; that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off! 6:10 Then
should I yet have comfort; yea, I would harden myself in sorrow: let
him not spare; for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One. 6:11 What is my strength, that I should hope? and what is mine end,
that I should prolong my life? 6:12 Is my strength the strength of
stones? or is my flesh of brass? 6:13 Is not my help in me? and is
wisdom driven quite from me? 6:14 To him that is afflicted pity
should be shewed from his friend; but he forsaketh the fear of the
Almighty. 6:15 My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream
of brooks they pass away; 6:16 Which are blackish by reason of the
ice, and wherein the snow is hid: 6:17 What time they wax warm, they
vanish: when it is hot, they are consumed out of their place. 6:18 The paths of their way are turned aside; they go to nothing, and
perish. 6:19 The troops of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for
them. 6:20 They were confounded because they had hoped; they came thither,
and were ashamed. 6:21 For now ye are nothing; ye see my casting down, and are afraid. 6:22 Did I say, Bring unto me? or, Give a reward for me of your
substance? 6:23 Or, Deliver me from the enemy's hand? or, Redeem me
from the hand of the mighty? 6:24 Teach me, and I will hold my
tongue: and cause me to understand wherein I have erred. 6:25 How forcible are right words! but what doth your arguing reprove? 6:26 Do ye imagine to reprove words, and the speeches of one that is
desperate, which are as wind? 6:27 Yea, ye overwhelm the fatherless,
and ye dig a pit for your friend. 6:28 Now therefore be content, look upon me; for it is evident unto
you if I lie. 6:29 Return, I pray you, let it not be iniquity; yea, return again, my
righteousness is in it. 6:30 Is there iniquity in my tongue? cannot my taste discern perverse
things? 7:1 Is there not an appointed time to man upon earth? are not
his days also like the days of an hireling? 7:2 As a servant
earnestly desireth the shadow, and as an hireling looketh for the
reward of his work: 7:3 So am I made to possess months of vanity, and
wearisome nights are appointed to me. 7:4 When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? and I am full of tossings to and fro unto the dawning of the day. 7:5 My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust; my skin is
broken, and become loathsome. 7:6 My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without
hope. 7:7 O remember that my life is wind: mine eye shall no more see good. 7:8 The eye of him that hath seen me shall see me no more: thine eyes
are upon me, and I am not. 7:9 As the cloud is consumed and vanisheth away: so he that goeth down
to the grave shall come up no more. 7:10 He shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place
know him any more. 7:11 Therefore I will not refrain my mouth; I will speak in the
anguish of my spirit; I will complain in the bitterness of my soul. 7:12 Am I a sea, or a whale, that thou settest a watch over me? 7:13
When I say, My bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my
complaints; 7:14 Then thou scarest me with dreams, and terrifiest me
through visions: 7:15 So that my soul chooseth strangling, and death
rather than my life. 7:16 I loathe it; I would not live alway: let me alone; for my days
are vanity. 7:17 What is man, that thou shouldest magnify him? and that thou
shouldest set thine heart upon him? 7:18 And that thou shouldest
visit him every morning, and try him every moment? 7:19 How long wilt
thou not depart from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my
spittle? 7:20 I have sinned; what shall I do unto thee, O thou
preserver of men? why hast thou set me as a mark against thee, so
that I am a burden to myself? 7:21 And why dost thou not pardon my
transgression, and take away my iniquity? for now shall I sleep in the
dust; and thou shalt seek me in the morning, but I shall not be. 8:1 Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, 8:2 How long wilt thou
speak these things? and how long shall the words of thy mouth be like
a strong wind? 8:3 Doth God pervert judgment? or doth the Almighty
pervert justice? 8:4 If thy children have sinned against him, and he
have cast them away for their transgression; 8:5 If thou wouldest seek
unto God betimes, and make thy supplication to the Almighty; 8:6 If
thou wert pure and upright; surely now he would awake for thee, and
make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous. 8:7 Though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end should greatly
increase. 8:8 For enquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and prepare thyself
to the search of their fathers: 8:9 (For we are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow:) 8:10 Shall
not they teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their
heart? 8:11 Can the rush grow up without mire? can the flag grow
without water? 8:12 Whilst it is yet in his greenness, and not cut
down, it withereth before any other herb. 8:13 So are the paths of all that forget God; and the hypocrite's hope
shall perish: 8:14 Whose hope shall be cut off, and whose trust shall
be a spider's web. 8:15 He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand: he shall
hold it fast, but it shall not endure. 8:16 He is green before the sun, and his branch shooteth forth in his
garden. 8:17 His roots are wrapped about the heap, and seeth the place of
stones. 8:18 If he destroy him from his place, then it shall deny him, saying,
I have not seen thee. 8:19 Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth shall
others grow. 8:20 Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, neither will he
help the evil doers: 8:21 Till he fill thy mouth with laughing, and
thy lips with rejoicing. 8:22 They that hate thee shall be clothed with shame; and the dwelling
place of the wicked shall come to nought. 9:1 Then Job answered and said, 9:2 I know it is so of a truth: but
how should man be just with God? 9:3 If he will contend with him, he
cannot answer him one of a thousand. 9:4 He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength: who hath hardened
himself against him, and hath prospered? 9:5 Which removeth the
mountains, and they know not: which overturneth them in his anger. 9:6 Which shaketh the earth out of her place, and the pillars thereof
tremble. 9:7 Which commandeth the sun, and it riseth not; and sealeth up the
stars. 9:8 Which alone spreadeth out the heavens, and treadeth upon the waves
of the sea. 9:9 Which maketh Arcturus, Orion, and Pleiades, and the chambers of
the south. 9:10 Which doeth great things past finding out; yea, and wonders
without number. 9:11 Lo, he goeth by me, and I see him not: he passeth on also, but I
perceive him not. 9:12 Behold, he taketh away, who can hinder him? who will say unto
him, What doest thou? 9:13 If God will not withdraw his anger, the
proud helpers do stoop under him. 9:14 How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to
reason with him? 9:15 Whom, though I were righteous, yet would I not
answer, but I would make supplication to my judge. 9:16 If I had called, and he had answered me; yet would I not believe
that he had hearkened unto my voice. 9:17 For he breaketh me with a tempest, and multiplieth my wounds
without cause. 9:18 He will not suffer me to take my breath, but filleth me with
bitterness. 9:19 If I speak of strength, lo, he is strong: and if of judgment, who
shall set me a time to plead? 9:20 If I justify myself, mine own
mouth shall condemn me: if I say, I am perfect, it shall also prove me
perverse. 9:21 Though I were perfect, yet would I not know my soul: I would
despise my life. 9:22 This is one thing, therefore I said it, He destroyeth the perfect
and the wicked. 9:23 If the scourge slay suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the
innocent. 9:24 The earth is given into the hand of the wicked: he covereth the
faces of the judges thereof; if not, where, and who is he? 9:25 Now
my days are swifter than a post: they flee away, they see no good. 9:26 They are passed away as the swift ships: as the eagle that
hasteth to the prey. 9:27 If I say, I will forget my complaint, I will leave off my
heaviness, and comfort myself: 9:28 I am afraid of all my sorrows, I
know that thou wilt not hold me innocent. 9:29 If I be wicked, why then labour I in vain? 9:30 If I wash myself
with snow water, and make my hands never so clean; 9:31 Yet shalt thou
plunge me in the ditch, and mine own clothes shall abhor me. 9:32 For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, and we
should come together in judgment. 9:33 Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand
upon us both. 9:34 Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his fear terrify
me: 9:35 Then would I speak, and not fear him; but it is not so with
me. 10:1 My soul is weary of my life; I will leave my complaint upon
myself; I will speak in the bitterness of my soul. 10:2 I will say unto God, Do not condemn me; shew me wherefore thou
contendest with me. 10:3 Is it good unto thee that thou shouldest oppress, that thou
shouldest despise the work of thine hands, and shine upon the counsel
of the wicked? 10:4 Hast thou eyes of flesh? or seest thou as man
seeth? 10:5 Are thy days as the days of man? are thy years as man's
days, 10:6 That thou enquirest after mine iniquity, and searchest
after my sin? 10:7 Thou knowest that I am not wicked; and there is
none that can deliver out of thine hand. 10:8 Thine hands have made me and fashioned me together round about;
yet thou dost destroy me. 10:9 Remember, I beseech thee, that thou hast made me as the clay; and
wilt thou bring me into dust again? 10:10 Hast thou not poured me out
as milk, and curdled me like cheese? 10:11 Thou hast clothed me with
skin and flesh, and hast fenced me with bones and sinews. 10:12 Thou hast granted me life and favour, and thy visitation hath
preserved my spirit. 10:13 And these things hast thou hid in thine heart: I know that this
is with thee. 10:14 If I sin, then thou markest me, and thou wilt not acquit me from
mine iniquity. 10:15 If I be wicked, woe unto me; and if I be righteous, yet will I
not lift up my head. I am full of confusion; therefore see thou mine
affliction; 10:16 For it increaseth. Thou huntest me as a fierce lion:
and again thou shewest thyself marvellous upon me. 10:17 Thou renewest thy witnesses against me, and increasest thine
indignation upon me; changes and war are against me. 10:18 Wherefore then hast thou brought me forth out of the womb? Oh
that I had given up the ghost, and no eye had seen me! 10:19 I should
have been as though I had not been; I should have been carried from
the womb to the grave. 10:20 Are not my days few? cease then, and let me alone, that I may
take comfort a little, 10:21 Before I go whence I shall not return,
even to the land of darkness and the shadow of death; 10:22 A land of
darkness, as darkness itself; and of the shadow of death, without any
order, and where the light is as darkness. 11:1 Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said, 11:2 Should not
the multitude of words be answered? and should a man full of talk be
justified? 11:3 Should thy lies make men hold their peace? and when
thou mockest, shall no man make thee ashamed? 11:4 For thou hast
said, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes. 11:5 But oh that God would speak, and open his lips against thee; 11:6
And that he would shew thee the secrets of wisdom, that they are
double to that which is! Know therefore that God exacteth of thee less
than thine iniquity deserveth. 11:7 Canst thou by searching find out God? canst thou find out the
Almighty unto perfection? 11:8 It is as high as heaven; what canst
thou do? deeper than hell; what canst thou know? 11:9 The measure
thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea. 11:10 If he cut off, and shut up, or gather together, then who can
hinder him? 11:11 For he knoweth vain men: he seeth wickedness also;
will he not then consider it? 11:12 For vain men would be wise,
though man be born like a wild ass's colt. 11:13 If thou prepare thine heart, and stretch out thine hands toward
him; 11:14 If iniquity be in thine hand, put it far away, and let not
wickedness dwell in thy tabernacles. 11:15 For then shalt thou lift up thy face without spot; yea, thou
shalt be stedfast, and shalt not fear: 11:16 Because thou shalt forget
thy misery, and remember it as waters that pass away: 11:17 And thine
age shall be clearer than the noonday: thou shalt shine forth, thou
shalt be as the morning. 11:18 And thou shalt be secure, because there is hope; yea, thou shalt
dig about thee, and thou shalt take thy rest in safety. 11:19 Also thou shalt lie down, and none shall make thee afraid; yea,
many shall make suit unto thee. 11:20 But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall not
escape, and their hope shall be as the giving up of the ghost. 12:1 And Job answered and said, 12:2 No doubt but ye are the people,
and wisdom shall die with you. 12:3 But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to
you: yea, who knoweth not such things as these? 12:4 I am as one
mocked of his neighbour, who calleth upon God, and he answereth him:
the just upright man is laughed to scorn. 12:5 He that is ready to slip with his feet is as a lamp despised in
the thought of him that is at ease. 12:6 The tabernacles of robbers prosper, and they that provoke God are
secure; into whose hand God bringeth abundantly. 12:7 But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls
of the air, and they shall tell thee: 12:8 Or speak to the earth, and
it shall teach thee: and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto
thee. 12:9 Who knoweth not in all these that the hand of the LORD hath
wrought this? 12:10 In whose hand is the soul of every living thing,
and the breath of all mankind. 12:11 Doth not the ear try words? and the mouth taste his meat? 12:12
With the ancient is wisdom; and in length of days understanding. 12:13 With him is wisdom and strength, he hath counsel and
understanding. 12:14 Behold, he breaketh down, and it cannot be built again: he
shutteth up a man, and there can be no opening. 12:15 Behold, he withholdeth the waters, and they dry up: also he
sendeth them out, and they overturn the earth. 12:16 With him is strength and wisdom: the deceived and the deceiver
are his. 12:17 He leadeth counsellors away spoiled, and maketh the judges
fools. 12:18 He looseth the bond of kings, and girdeth their loins with a
girdle. 12:19 He leadeth princes away spoiled, and overthroweth the mighty. 12:20 He removeth away the speech of the trusty, and taketh away the
understanding of the aged. 12:21 He poureth contempt upon princes, and weakeneth the strength of
the mighty. 12:22 He discovereth deep things out of darkness, and bringeth out to
light the shadow of death. 12:23 He increaseth the nations, and destroyeth them: he enlargeth the
nations, and straiteneth them again. 12:24 He taketh away the heart of the chief of the people of the
earth, and causeth them to wander in a wilderness where there is no
way. 12:25 They grope in the dark without light, and he maketh them to
stagger like a drunken man. 13:1 Lo, mine eye hath seen all this, mine ear hath heard and
understood it. 13:2 What ye know, the same do I know also: I am not inferior unto
you. 13:3 Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with
God. 13:4 But ye are forgers of lies, ye are all physicians of no value. 13:5 O that ye would altogether hold your peace! and it should be your
wisdom. 13:6 Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips. 13:7 Will ye speak wickedly for God? and talk deceitfully for him? 13:8 Will ye accept his person? will ye contend for God? 13:9 Is it
good that he should search you out? or as one man mocketh another, do
ye so mock him? 13:10 He will surely reprove you, if ye do secretly
accept persons. 13:11 Shall not his excellency make you afraid? and his dread fall
upon you? 13:12 Your remembrances are like unto ashes, your bodies to
bodies of clay. 13:13 Hold your peace, let me alone, that I may speak, and let come on
me what will. 13:14 Wherefore do I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in
mine hand? 13:15 Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him: but I
will maintain mine own ways before him. 13:16 He also shall be my salvation: for an hypocrite shall not come
before him. 13:17 Hear diligently my speech, and my declaration with your ears. 13:18 Behold now, I have ordered my cause; I know that I shall be
justified. 13:19 Who is he that will plead with me? for now, if I hold my tongue,
I shall give up the ghost. 13:20 Only do not two things unto me: then will I not hide myself from
thee. 13:21 Withdraw thine hand far from me: and let not thy dread make me
afraid. 13:22 Then call thou, and I will answer: or let me speak, and answer
thou me. 13:23 How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my
transgression and my sin. 13:24 Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and holdest me for thine enemy? 13:25 Wilt thou break a leaf driven to and fro? and wilt thou pursue
the dry stubble? 13:26 For thou writest bitter things against me, and
makest me to possess the iniquities of my youth. 13:27 Thou puttest my feet also in the stocks, and lookest narrowly
unto all my paths; thou settest a print upon the heels of my feet. 13:28 And he, as a rotten thing, consumeth, as a garment that is moth
eaten. 14:1 Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of trouble. 14:2 He cometh forth like a flower, and is cut down: he fleeth also as
a shadow, and continueth not. 14:3 And doth thou open thine eyes upon such an one, and bringest me
into judgment with thee? 14:4 Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one. 14:5 Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months are with
thee, thou hast appointed his bounds that he cannot pass; 14:6 Turn
from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as an hireling,
his day. 14:7 For there is hope of a tree, if it be cut down, that it will
sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not cease. 14:8 Though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock
thereof die in the ground; 14:9 Yet through the scent of water it will
bud, and bring forth boughs like a plant. 14:10 But man dieth, and wasteth away: yea, man giveth up the ghost,
and where is he? 14:11 As the waters fail from the sea, and the flood
decayeth and drieth up: 14:12 So man lieth down, and riseth not: till
the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be raised out of
their sleep. 14:13 O that thou wouldest hide me in the grave, that thou wouldest
keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou wouldest appoint me
a set time, and remember me! 14:14 If a man die, shall he live again? all the days of my appointed time will I wait, till my change come. 14:15 Thou shalt call, and I will answer thee: thou wilt have a desire
to the work of thine hands. 14:16 For now thou numberest my steps: dost thou not watch over my
sin? 14:17 My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou sewest up
mine iniquity. 14:18 And surely the mountains falling cometh to nought, and the rock
is removed out of his place. 14:19 The waters wear the stones: thou washest away the things which
grow out of the dust of the earth; and thou destroyest the hope of
man. 14:20 Thou prevailest for ever against him, and he passeth: thou
changest his countenance, and sendest him away. 14:21 His sons come to honour, and he knoweth it not; and they are
brought low, but he perceiveth it not of them. 14:22 But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him
shall mourn. 15:1 Then answered Eliphaz the Temanite, and said, 15:2 Should a wise
man utter vain knowledge, and fill his belly with the east wind? 15:3
Should he reason with unprofitable talk? or with speeches wherewith he
can do no good? 15:4 Yea, thou castest off fear, and restrainest
prayer before God. 15:5 For thy mouth uttereth thine iniquity, and thou choosest the
tongue of the crafty. 15:6 Thine own mouth condemneth thee, and not I: yea, thine own lips
testify against thee. 15:7 Art thou the first man that was born? or wast thou made before
the hills? 15:8 Hast thou heard the secret of God? and dost thou
restrain wisdom to thyself? 15:9 What knowest thou, that we know not? what understandest thou, which is not in us? 15:10 With us are both
the grayheaded and very aged men, much elder than thy father. 15:11 Are the consolations of God small with thee? is there any secret
thing with thee? 15:12 Why doth thine heart carry thee away? and what
do thy eyes wink at, 15:13 That thou turnest thy spirit against God,
and lettest such words go out of thy mouth? 15:14 What is man, that
he should be clean? and he which is born of a woman, that he should be
righteous? 15:15 Behold, he putteth no trust in his saints; yea, the
heavens are not clean in his sight. 15:16 How much more abominable and filthy is man, which drinketh
iniquity like water? 15:17 I will shew thee, hear me; and that which
I have seen I will declare; 15:18 Which wise men have told from their
fathers, and have not hid it: 15:19 Unto whom alone the earth was
given, and no stranger passed among them. 15:20 The wicked man travaileth with pain all his days, and the number
of years is hidden to the oppressor. 15:21 A dreadful sound is in his ears: in prosperity the destroyer
shall come upon him. 15:22 He believeth not that he shall return out of darkness, and he is
waited for of the sword. 15:23 He wandereth abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? he knoweth
that the day of darkness is ready at his hand. 15:24 Trouble and anguish shall make him afraid; they shall prevail
against him, as a king ready to the battle. 15:25 For he stretcheth out his hand against God, and strengtheneth
himself against the Almighty. 15:26 He runneth upon him, even on his neck, upon the thick bosses of
his bucklers: 15:27 Because he covereth his face with his fatness, and
maketh collops of fat on his flanks. 15:28 And he dwelleth in desolate cities, and in houses which no man
inhabiteth, which are ready to become heaps. 15:29 He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue,
neither shall he prolong the perfection thereof upon the earth. 15:30 He shall not depart out of darkness; the flame shall dry up his
branches, and by the breath of his mouth shall he go away. 15:31 Let not him that is deceived trust in vanity: for vanity shall
be his recompence. 15:32 It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall
not be green. 15:33 He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast
off his flower as the olive. 15:34 For the congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire
shall consume the tabernacles of bribery. 15:35 They conceive mischief, and bring forth vanity, and their belly
prepareth deceit. 16:1 Then Job answered and said, 16:2 I have heard many such things:
miserable comforters are ye all. 16:3 Shall vain words have an end? or what emboldeneth thee that thou
answerest? 16:4 I also could speak as ye do: if your soul were in my
soul's stead, I could heap up words against you, and shake mine head
at you. 16:5 But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my
lips should asswage your grief. 16:6 Though I speak, my grief is not asswaged: and though I forbear,
what am I eased? 16:7 But now he hath made me weary: thou hast made
desolate all my company. 16:8 And thou hast filled me with wrinkles, which is a witness against
me: and my leanness rising up in me beareth witness to my face. 16:9 He teareth me in his wrath, who hateth me: he gnasheth upon me
with his teeth; mine enemy sharpeneth his eyes upon me. 16:10 They have gaped upon me with their mouth; they have smitten me
upon the cheek reproachfully; they have gathered themselves together
against me. 16:11 God hath delivered me to the ungodly, and turned me over into
the hands of the wicked. 16:12 I was at ease, but he hath broken me asunder: he hath also taken
me by my neck, and shaken me to pieces, and set me up for his mark. 16:13 His archers compass me round about, he cleaveth my reins
asunder, and doth not spare; he poureth out my gall upon the ground. 16:14 He breaketh me with breach upon breach, he runneth upon me like
a giant. 16:15 I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and defiled my horn in the
dust. 16:16 My face is foul with weeping, and on my eyelids is the shadow of
death; 16:17 Not for any injustice in mine hands: also my prayer is
pure. 16:18 O earth, cover not thou my blood, and let my cry have no place. 16:19 Also now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and my record is on
high. 16:20 My friends scorn me: but mine eye poureth out tears unto God. 16:21 O that one might plead for a man with God, as a man pleadeth for
his neighbour! 16:22 When a few years are come, then I shall go the
way whence I shall not return. 17:1 My breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the graves are ready
for me. 17:2 Are there not mockers with me? and doth not mine eye continue in
their provocation? 17:3 Lay down now, put me in a surety with thee;
who is he that will strike hands with me? 17:4 For thou hast hid
their heart from understanding: therefore shalt thou not exalt them. 17:5 He that speaketh flattery to his friends, even the eyes of his
children shall fail. 17:6 He hath made me also a byword of the people; and aforetime I was
as a tabret. 17:7 Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow, and all my members are
as a shadow. 17:8 Upright men shall be astonied at this, and the innocent shall
stir up himself against the hypocrite. 17:9 The righteous also shall hold on his way, and he that hath clean
hands shall be stronger and stronger. 17:10 But as for you all, do ye return, and come now: for I cannot
find one wise man among you. 17:11 My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts
of my heart. 17:12 They change the night into day: the light is short because of
darkness. 17:13 If I wait, the grave is mine house: I have made my bed in the
darkness. 17:14 I have said to corruption, Thou art my father: to the worm, Thou
art my mother, and my sister. 17:15 And where is now my hope? as for my hope, who shall see it? 17:16 They shall go down to the bars of the pit, when our rest
together is in the dust. 18:1 Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and said, 18:2 How long will it
be ere ye make an end of words? mark, and afterwards we will speak. 18:3 Wherefore are we counted as beasts, and reputed vile in your
sight? 18:4 He teareth himself in his anger: shall the earth be
forsaken for thee? and shall the rock be removed out of his place? 18:5 Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of
his fire shall not shine. 18:6 The light shall be dark in his tabernacle, and his candle shall
be put out with him. 18:7 The steps of his strength shall be straitened, and his own
counsel shall cast him down. 18:8 For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walketh upon a
snare. 18:9 The gin shall take him by the heel, and the robber shall prevail
against him. 18:10 The snare is laid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in
the way. 18:11 Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall drive him
to his feet. 18:12 His strength shall be hungerbitten, and destruction shall be
ready at his side. 18:13 It shall devour the strength of his skin: even the firstborn of
death shall devour his strength. 18:14 His confidence shall be rooted out of his tabernacle, and it
shall bring him to the king of terrors. 18:15 It shall dwell in his tabernacle, because it is none of his:
brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation. 18:16 His roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch
be cut off. 18:17 His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have
no name in the street. 18:18 He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of
the world. 18:19 He shall neither have son nor nephew among his people, nor any
remaining in his dwellings. 18:20 They that come after him shall be astonied at his day, as they
that went before were affrighted. 18:21 Surely such are the dwellings of the wicked, and this is the
place of him that knoweth not God. 19:1 Then Job answered and said, 19:2 How long will ye vex my soul,
and break me in pieces with words? 19:3 These ten times have ye
reproached me: ye are not ashamed that ye make yourselves strange to
me. 19:4 And be it indeed that I have erred, mine error remaineth with
myself. 19:5 If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me, and plead
against me my reproach: 19:6 Know now that God hath overthrown me, and
hath compassed me with his net. 19:7 Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard: I cry aloud, but
there is no judgment. 19:8 He hath fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and he hath set
darkness in my paths. 19:9 He hath stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my
head. 19:10 He hath destroyed me on every side, and I am gone: and mine hope
hath he removed like a tree. 19:11 He hath also kindled his wrath against me, and he counteth me
unto him as one of his enemies. 19:12 His troops come together, and raise up their way against me, and
encamp round about my tabernacle. 19:13 He hath put my brethren far from me, and mine acquaintance are
verily estranged from me. 19:14 My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten
me. 19:15 They that dwell in mine house, and my maids, count me for a
stranger: I am an alien in their sight. 19:16 I called my servant, and he gave me no answer; I intreated him
with my mouth. 19:17 My breath is strange to my wife, though I intreated for the
children's sake of mine own body. 19:18 Yea, young children despised me; I arose, and they spake against
me. 19:19 All my inward friends abhorred me: and they whom I loved are
turned against me. 19:20 My bone cleaveth to my skin and to my flesh, and I am escaped
with the skin of my teeth. 19:21 Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends; for the
hand of God hath touched me. 19:22 Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my
flesh? 19:23 Oh that my words were now written! oh that they were
printed in a book! 19:24 That they were graven with an iron pen and
lead in the rock for ever! 19:25 For I know that my redeemer liveth,
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth: 19:26 And
though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I
see God: 19:27 Whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall
behold, and not another; though my reins be consumed within me. 19:28 But ye should say, Why persecute we him, seeing the root of the
matter is found in me? 19:29 Be ye afraid of the sword: for wrath
bringeth the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a
judgment. 20:1 Then answered Zophar the Naamathite, and said, 20:2 Therefore do
my thoughts cause me to answer, and for this I make haste. 20:3 I have heard the check of my reproach, and the spirit of my
understanding causeth me to answer. 20:4 Knowest thou not this of old, since man was placed upon earth,
20:5 That the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the
hypocrite but for a moment? 20:6 Though his excellency mount up to
the heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds; 20:7 Yet he shall
perish for ever like his own dung: they which have seen him shall say,
Where is he? 20:8 He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be
found: yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night. 20:9 The eye also which saw him shall see him no more; neither shall
his place any more behold him. 20:10 His children shall seek to please the poor, and his hands shall
restore their goods. 20:11 His bones are full of the sin of his youth, which shall lie down
with him in the dust. 20:12 Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under
his tongue; 20:13 Though he spare it, and forsake it not; but keep it
still within his mouth: 20:14 Yet his meat in his bowels is turned, it
is the gall of asps within him. 20:15 He hath swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again:
God shall cast them out of his belly. 20:16 He shall suck the poison of asps: the viper's tongue shall slay
him. 20:17 He shall not see the rivers, the floods, the brooks of honey and
butter. 20:18 That which he laboured for shall he restore, and shall not
swallow it down: according to his substance shall the restitution be,
and he shall not rejoice therein. 20:19 Because he hath oppressed and hath forsaken the poor; because he
hath violently taken away an house which he builded not; 20:20 Surely
he shall not feel quietness in his belly, he shall not save of that
which he desired. 20:21 There shall none of his meat be left; therefore shall no man
look for his goods. 20:22 In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits: every
hand of the wicked shall come upon him. 20:23 When he is about to fill his belly, God shall cast the fury of
his wrath upon him, and shall rain it upon him while he is eating. 20:24 He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall
strike him through. 20:25 It is drawn, and cometh out of the body; yea, the glittering
sword cometh out of his gall: terrors are upon him. 20:26 All darkness shall be hid in his secret places: a fire not blown
shall consume him; it shall go ill with him that is left in his
tabernacle. 20:27 The heaven shall reveal his iniquity; and the earth shall rise
up against him. 20:28 The increase of his house shall depart, and his goods shall flow
away in the day of his wrath. 20:29 This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage
appointed unto him by God. 21:1 But Job answered and said, 21:2 Hear diligently my speech, and
let this be your consolations. 21:3 Suffer me that I may speak; and after that I have spoken, mock
on. 21:4 As for me, is my complaint to man? and if it were so, why should
not my spirit be troubled? 21:5 Mark me, and be astonished, and lay
your hand upon your mouth. 21:6 Even when I remember I am afraid, and trembling taketh hold on my
flesh. 21:7 Wherefore do the wicked live, become old, yea, are mighty in
power? 21:8 Their seed is established in their sight with them, and
their offspring before their eyes. 21:9 Their houses are safe from fear, neither is the rod of God upon
them. 21:10 Their bull gendereth, and faileth not; their cow calveth, and
casteth not her calf. 21:11 They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their
children dance. 21:12 They take the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the
organ. 21:13 They spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the
grave. 21:14 Therefore they say unto God, Depart from us; for we desire not
the knowledge of thy ways. 21:15 What is the Almighty, that we should serve him? and what profit
should we have, if we pray unto him? 21:16 Lo, their good is not in
their hand: the counsel of the wicked is far from me. 21:17 How oft is the candle of the wicked put out! and how oft cometh
their destruction upon them! God distributeth sorrows in his anger. 21:18 They are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm
carrieth away. 21:19 God layeth up his iniquity for his children: he rewardeth him,
and he shall know it. 21:20 His eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink of the
wrath of the Almighty. 21:21 For what pleasure hath he in his house after him, when the
number of his months is cut off in the midst? 21:22 Shall any teach
God knowledge? seeing he judgeth those that are high. 21:23 One dieth in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet. 21:24 His breasts are full of milk, and his bones are moistened with
marrow. 21:25 And another dieth in the bitterness of his soul, and never
eateth with pleasure. 21:26 They shall lie down alike in the dust, and the worms shall cover
them. 21:27 Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices which ye
wrongfully imagine against me. 21:28 For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? and where are the
dwelling places of the wicked? 21:29 Have ye not asked them that go
by the way? and do ye not know their tokens, 21:30 That the wicked is
reserved to the day of destruction? they shall be brought forth to the
day of wrath. 21:31 Who shall declare his way to his face? and who shall repay him
what he hath done? 21:32 Yet shall he be brought to the grave, and
shall remain in the tomb. 21:33 The clods of the valley shall be sweet unto him, and every man
shall draw after him, as there are innumerable before him. 21:34 How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there
remaineth falsehood? 22:1 Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered and
said, 22:2 Can a man be profitable unto God, as he that is wise may be
profitable unto himself? 22:3 Is it any pleasure to the Almighty,
that thou art righteous? or is it gain to him, that thou makest thy
ways perfect? 22:4 Will he reprove thee for fear of thee? will he
enter with thee into judgment? 22:5 Is not thy wickedness great? and
thine iniquities infinite? 22:6 For thou hast taken a pledge from thy
brother for nought, and stripped the naked of their clothing. 22:7 Thou hast not given water to the weary to drink, and thou hast
withholden bread from the hungry. 22:8 But as for the mighty man, he had the earth; and the honourable
man dwelt in it. 22:9 Thou hast sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless
have been broken. 22:10 Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubleth
thee; 22:11 Or darkness, that thou canst not see; and abundance of
waters cover thee. 22:12 Is not God in the height of heaven? and behold the height of the
stars, how high they are! 22:13 And thou sayest, How doth God know? can he judge through the dark cloud? 22:14 Thick clouds are a
covering to him, that he seeth not; and he walketh in the circuit of
heaven. 22:15 Hast thou marked the old way which wicked men have trodden? 22:16 Which were cut down out of time, whose foundation was overflown
with a flood: 22:17 Which said unto God, Depart from us: and what can
the Almighty do for them? 22:18 Yet he filled their houses with good
things: but the counsel of the wicked is far from me. 22:19 The righteous see it, and are glad: and the innocent laugh them
to scorn. 22:20 Whereas our substance is not cut down, but the remnant of them
the fire consumeth. 22:21 Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace: thereby good
shall come unto thee. 22:22 Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his
words in thine heart. 22:23 If thou return to the Almighty, thou shalt be built up, thou
shalt put away iniquity far from thy tabernacles. 22:24 Then shalt thou lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as
the stones of the brooks. 22:25 Yea, the Almighty shall be thy defence, and thou shalt have
plenty of silver. 22:26 For then shalt thou have thy delight in the Almighty, and shalt
lift up thy face unto God. 22:27 Thou shalt make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear thee, and
thou shalt pay thy vows. 22:28 Thou shalt also decree a thing, and it shall be established unto
thee: and the light shall shine upon thy ways. 22:29 When men are cast down, then thou shalt say, There is lifting
up; and he shall save the humble person. 22:30 He shall deliver the island of the innocent: and it is delivered
by the pureness of thine hands. 23:1 Then Job answered and said, 23:2 Even to day is my complaint
bitter: my stroke is heavier than my groaning. 23:3 Oh that I knew where I might find him! that I might come even to
his seat! 23:4 I would order my cause before him, and fill my mouth
with arguments. 23:5 I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand
what he would say unto me. 23:6 Will he plead against me with his great power? No; but he would
put strength in me. 23:7 There the righteous might dispute with him; so should I be
delivered for ever from my judge. 23:8 Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I
cannot perceive him: 23:9 On the left hand, where he doth work, but I
cannot behold him: he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot
see him: 23:10 But he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried
me, I shall come forth as gold. 23:11 My foot hath held his steps, his way have I kept, and not
declined. 23:12 Neither have I gone back from the commandment of his lips; I
have esteemed the words of his mouth more than my necessary food. 23:13 But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? and what his soul
desireth, even that he doeth. 23:14 For he performeth the thing that is appointed for me: and many
such things are with him. 23:15 Therefore am I troubled at his presence: when I consider, I am
afraid of him. 23:16 For God maketh my heart soft, and the Almighty troubleth me:
23:17 Because I was not cut off before the darkness, neither hath he
covered the darkness from my face. 24:1 Why, seeing times are not hidden from the Almighty, do they that
know him not see his days? 24:2 Some remove the landmarks; they
violently take away flocks, and feed thereof. 24:3 They drive away the ass of the fatherless, they take the widow's
ox for a pledge. 24:4 They turn the needy out of the way: the poor of the earth hide
themselves together. 24:5 Behold, as wild asses in the desert, go they forth to their work;
rising betimes for a prey: the wilderness yieldeth food for them and
for their children. 24:6 They reap every one his corn in the field: and they gather the
vintage of the wicked. 24:7 They cause the naked to lodge without clothing, that they have no
covering in the cold. 24:8 They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the
rock for want of a shelter. 24:9 They pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of
the poor. 24:10 They cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away
the sheaf from the hungry; 24:11 Which make oil within their walls,
and tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst. 24:12 Men groan from out of the city, and the soul of the wounded
crieth out: yet God layeth not folly to them. 24:13 They are of those that rebel against the light; they know not
the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof. 24:14 The murderer rising with the light killeth the poor and needy,
and in the night is as a thief. 24:15 The eye also of the adulterer waiteth for the twilight, saying,
No eye shall see me: and disguiseth his face. 24:16 In the dark they dig through houses, which they had marked for
themselves in the daytime: they know not the light. 24:17 For the morning is to them even as the shadow of death: if one
know them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death. 24:18 He is swift as the waters; their portion is cursed in the earth:
he beholdeth not the way of the vineyards. 24:19 Drought and heat consume the snow waters: so doth the grave
those which have sinned. 24:20 The womb shall forget him; the worm shall feed sweetly on him;
he shall be no more remembered; and wickedness shall be broken as a
tree. 24:21 He evil entreateth the barren that beareth not: and doeth not
good to the widow. 24:22 He draweth also the mighty with his power: he riseth up, and no
man is sure of life. 24:23 Though it be given him to be in safety, whereon he resteth; yet
his eyes are upon their ways. 24:24 They are exalted for a little while, but are gone and brought
low; they are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the
tops of the ears of corn. 24:25 And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my
speech nothing worth? 25:1 Then answered Bildad the Shuhite, and
said, 25:2 Dominion and fear are with him, he maketh peace in his high
places. 25:3 Is there any number of his armies? and upon whom doth not his
light arise? 25:4 How then can man be justified with God? or how can
he be clean that is born of a woman? 25:5 Behold even to the moon,
and it shineth not; yea, the stars are not pure in his sight. 25:6 How much less man, that is a worm? and the son of man, which is a
worm? 26:1 But Job answered and said, 26:2 How hast thou helped him
that is without power? how savest thou the arm that hath no strength? 26:3 How hast thou counselled him that hath no wisdom? and how hast
thou plentifully declared the thing as it is? 26:4 To whom hast thou
uttered words? and whose spirit came from thee? 26:5 Dead things are
formed from under the waters, and the inhabitants thereof. 26:6 Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. 26:7 He stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the
earth upon nothing. 26:8 He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the cloud is
not rent under them. 26:9 He holdeth back the face of his throne, and spreadeth his cloud
upon it. 26:10 He hath compassed the waters with bounds, until the day and
night come to an end. 26:11 The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his reproof. 26:12 He divideth the sea with his power, and by his understanding he
smiteth through the proud. 26:13 By his spirit he hath garnished the heavens; his hand hath
formed the crooked serpent. 26:14 Lo, these are parts of his ways: but how little a portion is
heard of him? but the thunder of his power who can understand? 27:1
Moreover Job continued his parable, and said, 27:2 As God liveth, who
hath taken away my judgment; and the Almighty, who hath vexed my soul;
27:3 All the while my breath is in me, and the spirit of God is in my
nostrils; 27:4 My lips shall not speak wickedness, nor my tongue utter
deceit. 27:5 God forbid that I should justify you: till I die I will not
remove mine integrity from me. 27:6 My righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live. 27:7 Let mine enemy be as the wicked, and he that riseth up against me
as the unrighteous. 27:8 For what is the hope of the hypocrite, though he hath gained,
when God taketh away his soul? 27:9 Will God hear his cry when
trouble cometh upon him? 27:10 Will he delight himself in the
Almighty? will he always call upon God? 27:11 I will teach you by the
hand of God: that which is with the Almighty will I not conceal. 27:12 Behold, all ye yourselves have seen it; why then are ye thus
altogether vain? 27:13 This is the portion of a wicked man with God,
and the heritage of oppressors, which they shall receive of the
Almighty. 27:14 If his children be multiplied, it is for the sword: and his
offspring shall not be satisfied with bread. 27:15 Those that remain of him shall be buried in death: and his
widows shall not weep. 27:16 Though he heap up silver as the dust, and prepare raiment as the
clay; 27:17 He may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the
innocent shall divide the silver. 27:18 He buildeth his house as a moth, and as a booth that the keeper
maketh. 27:19 The rich man shall lie down, but he shall not be gathered: he
openeth his eyes, and he is not. 27:20 Terrors take hold on him as waters, a tempest stealeth him away
in the night. 27:21 The east wind carrieth him away, and he departeth: and as a
storm hurleth him out of his place. 27:22 For God shall cast upon him, and not spare: he would fain flee
out of his hand. 27:23 Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his
place. 28:1 Surely there is a vein for the silver, and a place for gold where
they fine it. 28:2 Iron is taken out of the earth, and brass is molten out of the
stone. 28:3 He setteth an end to darkness, and searcheth out all perfection:
the stones of darkness, and the shadow of death. 28:4 The flood breaketh out from the inhabitant; even the waters
forgotten of the foot: they are dried up, they are gone away from men. 28:5 As for the earth, out of it cometh bread: and under it is turned
up as it were fire. 28:6 The stones of it are the place of sapphires: and it hath dust of
gold. 28:7 There is a path which no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture's
eye hath not seen: 28:8 The lion's whelps have not trodden it, nor the
fierce lion passed by it. 28:9 He putteth forth his hand upon the rock; he overturneth the
mountains by the roots. 28:10 He cutteth out rivers among the rocks; and his eye seeth every
precious thing. 28:11 He bindeth the floods from overflowing; and the thing that is
hid bringeth he forth to light. 28:12 But where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of
understanding? 28:13 Man knoweth not the price thereof; neither is it
found in the land of the living. 28:14 The depth saith, It is not in me: and the sea saith, It is not
with me. 28:15 It cannot be gotten for gold, neither shall silver be weighed
for the price thereof. 28:16 It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious
onyx, or the sapphire. 28:17 The gold and the crystal cannot equal it: and the exchange of it
shall not be for jewels of fine gold. 28:18 No mention shall be made of coral, or of pearls: for the price
of wisdom is above rubies. 28:19 The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, neither shall it be
valued with pure gold. 28:20 Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of
understanding? 28:21 Seeing it is hid from the eyes of all living,
and kept close from the fowls of the air. 28:22 Destruction and death say, We have heard the fame thereof with
our ears. 28:23 God understandeth the way thereof, and he knoweth the place
thereof. 28:24 For he looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the
whole heaven; 28:25 To make the weight for the winds; and he weigheth
the waters by measure. 28:26 When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning
of the thunder: 28:27 Then did he see it, and declare it; he prepared
it, yea, and searched it out. 28:28 And unto man he said, Behold, the fear of the LORD, that is
wisdom; and to depart from evil is understanding. 29:1 Moreover Job continued his parable, and said, 29:2 Oh that I were
as in months past, as in the days when God preserved me; 29:3 When his
candle shined upon my head, and when by his light I walked through
darkness; 29:4 As I was in the days of my youth, when the secret of
God was upon my tabernacle; 29:5 When the Almighty was yet with me,
when my children were about me; 29:6 When I washed my steps with
butter, and the rock poured me out rivers of oil; 29:7 When I went out
to the gate through the city, when I prepared my seat in the street! 29:8 The young men saw me, and hid themselves: and the aged arose, and
stood up. 29:9 The princes refrained talking, and laid their hand on their
mouth. 29:10 The nobles held their peace, and their tongue cleaved to the
roof of their mouth. 29:11 When the ear heard me, then it blessed me; and when the eye saw
me, it gave witness to me: 29:12 Because I delivered the poor that
cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. 29:13 The blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me: and I
caused the widow's heart to sing for joy. 29:14 I put on righteousness, and it clothed me: my judgment was as a
robe and a diadem. 29:15 I was eyes to the blind, and feet was I to the lame. 29:16 I was a father to the poor: and the cause which I knew not I
searched out. 29:17 And I brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of
his teeth. 29:18 Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multiply my
days as the sand. 29:19 My root was spread out by the waters, and the dew lay all night
upon my branch. 29:20 My glory was fresh in me, and my bow was renewed in my hand. 29:21 Unto me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence at my
counsel. 29:22 After my words they spake not again; and my speech dropped upon
them. 29:23 And they waited for me as for the rain; and they opened their
mouth wide as for the latter rain. 29:24 If I laughed on them, they believed it not; and the light of my
countenance they cast not down. 29:25 I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a king in the
army, as one that comforteth the mourners. 30:1 But now they that are younger than I have me in derision, whose
fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my flock. 30:2 Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me, in whom
old age was perished? 30:3 For want and famine they were solitary;
fleeing into the wilderness in former time desolate and waste. 30:4 Who cut up mallows by the bushes, and juniper roots for their
meat. 30:5 They were driven forth from among men, (they cried after them as
after a thief;) 30:6 To dwell in the cliffs of the valleys, in caves
of the earth, and in the rocks. 30:7 Among the bushes they brayed; under the nettles they were
gathered together. 30:8 They were children of fools, yea, children of base men: they were
viler than the earth. 30:9 And now am I their song, yea, I am their byword. 30:10 They abhor me, they flee far from me, and spare not to spit in
my face. 30:11 Because he hath loosed my cord, and afflicted me, they have also
let loose the bridle before me. 30:12 Upon my right hand rise the youth; they push away my feet, and
they raise up against me the ways of their destruction. 30:13 They mar my path, they set forward my calamity, they have no
helper. 30:14 They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters: in the
desolation they rolled themselves upon me. 30:15 Terrors are turned upon me: they pursue my soul as the wind: and
my welfare passeth away as a cloud. 30:16 And now my soul is poured out upon me; the days of affliction
have taken hold upon me. 30:17 My bones are pierced in me in the night season: and my sinews
take no rest. 30:18 By the great force of my disease is my garment changed: it
bindeth me about as the collar of my coat. 30:19 He hath cast me into the mire, and I am become like dust and
ashes. 30:20 I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou
regardest me not. 30:21 Thou art become cruel to me: with thy strong hand thou opposest
thyself against me. 30:22 Thou liftest me up to the wind; thou causest me to ride upon it,
and dissolvest my substance. 30:23 For I know that thou wilt bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living. 30:24 Howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave, though
they cry in his destruction. 30:25 Did not I weep for him that was in trouble? was not my soul
grieved for the poor? 30:26 When I looked for good, then evil came
unto me: and when I waited for light, there came darkness. 30:27 My bowels boiled, and rested not: the days of affliction
prevented me. 30:28 I went mourning without the sun: I stood up, and I cried in the
congregation. 30:29 I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls. 30:30 My skin is black upon me, and my bones are burned with heat. 30:31 My harp also is turned to mourning, and my organ into the voice
of them that weep. 31:1 I made a covenant with mine eyes; why then should I think upon a
maid? 31:2 For what portion of God is there from above? and what
inheritance of the Almighty from on high? 31:3 Is not destruction to
the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of iniquity? 31:4
Doth not he see my ways, and count all my steps? 31:5 If I have
walked with vanity, or if my foot hath hasted to deceit; 31:6 Let me
be weighed in an even balance that God may know mine integrity. 31:7 If my step hath turned out of the way, and mine heart walked
after mine eyes, and if any blot hath cleaved to mine hands; 31:8 Then
let me sow, and let another eat; yea, let my offspring be rooted out. 31:9 If mine heart have been deceived by a woman, or if I have laid
wait at my neighbour's door; 31:10 Then let my wife grind unto
another, and let others bow down upon her. 31:11 For this is an heinous crime; yea, it is an iniquity to be
punished by the judges. 31:12 For it is a fire that consumeth to destruction, and would root
out all mine increase. 31:13 If I did despise the cause of my manservant or of my
maidservant, when they contended with me; 31:14 What then shall I do
when God riseth up? and when he visiteth, what shall I answer him? 31:15 Did not he that made me in the womb make him? and did not one
fashion us in the womb? 31:16 If I have withheld the poor from their
desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail; 31:17 Or have
eaten my morsel myself alone, and the fatherless hath not eaten
thereof; 31:18 (For from my youth he was brought up with me, as with a
father, and I have guided her from my mother's womb;) 31:19 If I have
seen any perish for want of clothing, or any poor without covering;
31:20 If his loins have not blessed me, and if he were not warmed with
the fleece of my sheep; 31:21 If I have lifted up my hand against the
fatherless, when I saw my help in the gate: 31:22 Then let mine arm
fall from my shoulder blade, and mine arm be broken from the bone. 31:23 For destruction from God was a terror to me, and by reason of
his highness I could not endure. 31:24 If I have made gold my hope, or have said to the fine gold, Thou
art my confidence; 31:25 If I rejoice because my wealth was great, and
because mine hand had gotten much; 31:26 If I beheld the sun when it
shined, or the moon walking in brightness; 31:27 And my heart hath
been secretly enticed, or my mouth hath kissed my hand: 31:28 This
also were an iniquity to be punished by the judge: for I should have
denied the God that is above. 31:29 If I rejoice at the destruction of him that hated me, or lifted
up myself when evil found him: 31:30 Neither have I suffered my mouth
to sin by wishing a curse to his soul. 31:31 If the men of my tabernacle said not, Oh that we had of his
flesh! we cannot be satisfied. 31:32 The stranger did not lodge in the street: but I opened my doors
to the traveller. 31:33 If I covered my transgressions as Adam, by hiding mine iniquity
in my bosom: 31:34 Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt
of families terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the
door? 31:35 Oh that one would hear me! behold, my desire is, that the
Almighty would answer me, and that mine adversary had written a book. 31:36 Surely I would take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a crown
to me. 31:37 I would declare unto him the number of my steps; as a prince
would I go near unto him. 31:38 If my land cry against me, or that the furrows likewise thereof
complain; 31:39 If I have eaten the fruits thereof without money, or
have caused the owners thereof to lose their life: 31:40 Let thistles
grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended. 32:1 So these three men ceased to answer Job, because he was righteous
in his own eyes. 32:2 Then was kindled the wrath of Elihu the son of Barachel the
Buzite, of the kindred of Ram: against Job was his wrath kindled,
because he justified himself rather than God. 32:3 Also against his three friends was his wrath kindled, because
they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job. 32:4 Now Elihu had waited till Job had spoken, because they were elder
than he. 32:5 When Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these
three men, then his wrath was kindled. 32:6 And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I am
young, and ye are very old; wherefore I was afraid, and durst not shew
you mine opinion. 32:7 I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach
wisdom. 32:8 But there is a spirit in man: and the inspiration of the Almighty
giveth them understanding. 32:9 Great men are not always wise: neither do the aged understand
judgment. 32:10 Therefore I said, Hearken to me; I also will shew mine opinion. 32:11 Behold, I waited for your words; I gave ear to your reasons,
whilst ye searched out what to say. 32:12 Yea, I attended unto you, and, behold, there was none of you
that convinced Job, or that answered his words: 32:13 Lest ye should
say, We have found out wisdom: God thrusteth him down, not man. 32:14 Now he hath not directed his words against me: neither will I
answer him with your speeches. 32:15 They were amazed, they answered no more: they left off speaking. 32:16 When I had waited, (for they spake not, but stood still, and
answered no more;) 32:17 I said, I will answer also my part, I also
will shew mine opinion. 32:18 For I am full of matter, the spirit within me constraineth me. 32:19 Behold, my belly is as wine which hath no vent; it is ready to
burst like new bottles. 32:20 I will speak, that I may be refreshed: I will open my lips and
answer. 32:21 Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's person, neither let me
give flattering titles unto man. 32:22 For I know not to give flattering titles; in so doing my maker
would soon take me away. 33:1 Wherefore, Job, I pray thee, hear my speeches, and hearken to all
my words. 33:2 Behold, now I have opened my mouth, my tongue hath spoken in my
mouth. 33:3 My words shall be of the uprightness of my heart: and my lips
shall utter knowledge clearly. 33:4 The spirit of God hath made me, and the breath of the Almighty
hath given me life. 33:5 If thou canst answer me, set thy words in order before me, stand
up. 33:6 Behold, I am according to thy wish in God's stead: I also am
formed out of the clay. 33:7 Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, neither shall my
hand be heavy upon thee. 33:8 Surely thou hast spoken in mine hearing, and I have heard the
voice of thy words, saying, 33:9 I am clean without transgression, I
am innocent; neither is there iniquity in me. 33:10 Behold, he findeth occasions against me, he counteth me for his
enemy, 33:11 He putteth my feet in the stocks, he marketh all my
paths. 33:12 Behold, in this thou art not just: I will answer thee, that God
is greater than man. 33:13 Why dost thou strive against him? for he giveth not account of
any of his matters. 33:14 For God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it not. 33:15 In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falleth
upon men, in slumberings upon the bed; 33:16 Then he openeth the ears
of men, and sealeth their instruction, 33:17 That he may withdraw man
from his purpose, and hide pride from man. 33:18 He keepeth back his soul from the pit, and his life from
perishing by the sword. 33:19 He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multitude
of his bones with strong pain: 33:20 So that his life abhorreth bread,
and his soul dainty meat. 33:21 His flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen; and his
bones that were not seen stick out. 33:22 Yea, his soul draweth near unto the grave, and his life to the
destroyers. 33:23 If there be a messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a
thousand, to shew unto man his uprightness: 33:24 Then he is gracious
unto him, and saith, Deliver him from going down to the pit: I have
found a ransom. 33:25 His flesh shall be fresher than a child's: he shall return to
the days of his youth: 33:26 He shall pray unto God, and he will be
favourable unto him: and he shall see his face with joy: for he will
render unto man his righteousness. 33:27 He looketh upon men, and if any say, I have sinned, and
perverted that which was right, and it profited me not; 33:28 He will
deliver his soul from going into the pit, and his life shall see the
light. 33:29 Lo, all these things worketh God oftentimes with man, 33:30 To
bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light of
the living. 33:31 Mark well, O Job, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I will
speak. 33:32 If thou hast anything to say, answer me: speak, for I desire to
justify thee. 33:33 If not, hearken unto me: hold thy peace, and I shall teach thee
wisdom. 34:1 Furthermore Elihu answered and said, 34:2 Hear my words, O ye
wise men; and give ear unto me, ye that have knowledge. 34:3 For the ear trieth words, as the mouth tasteth meat. 34:4 Let us choose to us judgment: let us know among ourselves what is
good. 34:5 For Job hath said, I am righteous: and God hath taken away my
judgment. 34:6 Should I lie against my right? my wound is incurable without
transgression. 34:7 What man is like Job, who drinketh up scorning like water? 34:8
Which goeth in company with the workers of iniquity, and walketh with
wicked men. 34:9 For he hath said, It profiteth a man nothing that he should
delight himself with God. 34:10 Therefore hearken unto me ye men of understanding: far be it
from God, that he should do wickedness; and from the Almighty, that he
should commit iniquity. 34:11 For the work of a man shall he render unto him, and cause every
man to find according to his ways. 34:12 Yea, surely God will not do wickedly, neither will the Almighty
pervert judgment. 34:13 Who hath given him a charge over the earth? or who hath disposed
the whole world? 34:14 If he set his heart upon man, if he gather
unto himself his spirit and his breath; 34:15 All flesh shall perish
together, and man shall turn again unto dust. 34:16 If now thou hast understanding, hear this: hearken to the voice
of my words. 34:17 Shall even he that hateth right govern? and wilt thou condemn
him that is most just? 34:18 Is it fit to say to a king, Thou art
wicked? and to princes, Ye are ungodly? 34:19 How much less to him
that accepteth not the persons of princes, nor regardeth the rich more
than the poor? for they all are the work of his hands. 34:20 In a moment shall they die, and the people shall be troubled at
midnight, and pass away: and the mighty shall be taken away without
hand. 34:21 For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he seeth all his
goings. 34:22 There is no darkness, nor shadow of death, where the workers of
iniquity may hide themselves. 34:23 For he will not lay upon man more than right; that he should
enter into judgment with God. 34:24 He shall break in pieces mighty men without number, and set
others in their stead. 34:25 Therefore he knoweth their works, and he overturneth them in the
night, so that they are destroyed. 34:26 He striketh them as wicked men in the open sight of others;
34:27 Because they turned back from him, and would not consider any of
his ways: 34:28 So that they cause the cry of the poor to come unto
him, and he heareth the cry of the afflicted. 34:29 When he giveth quietness, who then can make trouble? and when he
hideth his face, who then can behold him? whether it be done against a
nation, or against a man only: 34:30 That the hypocrite reign not,
lest the people be ensnared. 34:31 Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have borne
chastisement, I will not offend any more: 34:32 That which I see not
teach thou me: if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. 34:33 Should it be according to thy mind? he will recompense it,
whether thou refuse, or whether thou choose; and not I: therefore
speak what thou knowest. 34:34 Let men of understanding tell me, and let a wise man hearken
unto me. 34:35 Job hath spoken without knowledge, and his words were without
wisdom. 34:36 My desire is that Job may be tried unto the end because of his
answers for wicked men. 34:37 For he addeth rebellion unto his sin, he clappeth his hands
among us, and multiplieth his words against God. 35:1 Elihu spake moreover, and said, 35:2 Thinkest thou this to be
right, that thou saidst, My righteousness is more than God's? 35:3
For thou saidst, What advantage will it be unto thee? and, What profit
shall I have, if I be cleansed from my sin? 35:4 I will answer thee,
and thy companions with thee. 35:5 Look unto the heavens, and see; and behold the clouds which are
higher than thou. 35:6 If thou sinnest, what doest thou against him? or if thy
transgressions be multiplied, what doest thou unto him? 35:7 If thou
be righteous, what givest thou him? or what receiveth he of thine
hand? 35:8 Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art; and thy
righteousness may profit the son of man. 35:9 By reason of the multitude of oppressions they make the oppressed
to cry: they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty. 35:10 But none saith, Where is God my maker, who giveth songs in the
night; 35:11 Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth, and
maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven? 35:12 There they cry, but
none giveth answer, because of the pride of evil men. 35:13 Surely God will not hear vanity, neither will the Almighty
regard it. 35:14 Although thou sayest thou shalt not see him, yet judgment is
before him; therefore trust thou in him. 35:15 But now, because it is not so, he hath visited in his anger; yet
he knoweth it not in great extremity: 35:16 Therefore doth Job open
his mouth in vain; he multiplieth words without knowledge. 36:1 Elihu also proceeded, and said, 36:2 Suffer me a little, and I
will shew thee that I have yet to speak on God's behalf. 36:3 I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe
righteousness to my Maker. 36:4 For truly my words shall not be false: he that is perfect in
knowledge is with thee.