There were dark, shadowy woods, and fields of flowers, and a
river. And there was a big barn. One of the little girls was named Louisa. She was very pretty, and ever
so strong; she could run for miles through the woods and not get tired. She had a splendid brain in her little head; it liked study, and it
thought interesting thoughts all day long. Louisa liked to sit in a corner by herself, sometimes, and write
thoughts in her diary; all the little girls kept diaries. She liked to
make up stories out of her own head, and sometimes she made verses. When the four little sisters had finished their lessons, and had helped
their mother wash up and sew, they used to go to the big barn to play;
and the best play of all was theatricals. Louisa liked theatricals
better than anything. They made the barn into a theatre, and the grown-up people came to see
the plays they acted. They used to climb up on the hay-loft for a stage,
and the grown people sat in chairs on the floor. It was great fun. One
of the plays they acted was _Jack and the Beanstalk_. They had a ladder
from the floor to the loft, and on the ladder they tied a vine all the
way up to the loft, to look like the wonderful beanstalk. One of the
little girls was dressed up to look like Jack, and she acted that part. When it came to the place in the story where the giant tried to follow
Jack, the little girl cut down the beanstalk, and down came the giant
tumbling from the loft. The giant was made out of pillows, with a great,
fierce head of paper, and funny clothes. Another story that they acted was _Cinderella_. They made a wonderful
big pumpkin out of the wheelbarrow, trimmed with yellow paper, and
Cinderella rolled away in it, when the fairy godmother waved her wand. One other beautiful story they used to play. It was the story of
_Pilgrim's Progress_; if you have never heard it, you must be sure to
read it as soon as you can read well enough to understand the
old-fashioned words. The little girls used to put shells in their hats
for a sign they were on a pilgrimage, as the old pilgrims used to do;
then they made journeys over the hill behind the house, and through the
woods, and down the lanes; and when the pilgrimage was over they had
apples and nuts to eat, in the happy land of home. Louisa loved all these plays, and she made some of her own and wrote
them down so that the children could act them. But better than fun or writing Louisa loved her mother, and by and by,
as the little girl began to grow into a big girl, she felt very sad to
see her dear mother work so hard. She helped all she could with the
housework, but nothing could really help the tired mother except money;
she needed money for food and clothes, and someone grown up, to help in
the house. But there never was enough money for these things, and
Louisa's mother grew more and more weary, and sometimes ill. I cannot
tell you how much Louisa suffered over this. At last, as Louisa thought about it, she came to care more about helping
her mother and her father and her sisters than about anything else in
all the world. And she began to work very hard to earn money. She sewed
for people, and when she was a little older she taught some little girls
their lessons, and then she wrote stories for the papers. Every bit of
money she earned, except what she had to use, she gave to her dear
family. It helped very much, but it was so little that Louisa never felt
as if she were doing anything. Every year she grew more unselfish, and every year she worked harder. She liked writing stories best of all her work, but she did not get much
money for them, and some people told her she was wasting her time. At last, one day, a publisher asked Louisa, who was now a woman, to
write a book for girls. Louisa was not very well, and she was very
tired, but she always said, "I'll try," when she had a chance to work;
so she said, "I'll try," to the publisher. When she thought about the
book she remembered the good times she used to have with her sisters in
the big, bare house in the country. And so she wrote a story and put all
that in it; she put her dear mother and her wise father in it, and all
the little sisters, and besides the jolly times and the plays, she put
the sad, hard times in,--the work and worry and going without things. When the book was written, she called it _Little Women_, and sent it to
the publisher. And, children, the little book made Louisa famous. It was so sweet and
funny and sad and real,--like our own lives,--that everybody wanted to
read it. Everybody bought it, and much money came from it. After so many
years, little Louisa's wish came true: she bought a nice house for her
family; she sent one of her sisters to Europe, to study; she gave her
father books; but best of all, she was able to see to it that the
beloved mother, so tired and so ill, could have rest and happiness. Never again did the dear mother have to do any hard work, and she had
pretty things about her all the rest of her life. Louisa Alcott, for that was Louisa's name, wrote many beautiful books
after this, and she became one of the most famous women of America. But
I think the most beautiful thing about her is what I have been telling
you: that she loved her mother so well that she gave her whole life to
make her happy. MY KINGDOM


The little Louisa I told you about, who wrote verses and stories in her
diary, used to like to play that she was a princess, and that her
kingdom was her own mind. When she had unkind or dissatisfied thoughts,
she tried to get rid of them by playing they were enemies of the
kingdom; and she drove them out with soldiers; the soldiers were
patience, duty, and love. It used to help Louisa to be good to play
this, and I think it may have helped make her the splendid woman she was
afterward. Maybe you would like to hear a poem she wrote about it, when
she was only fourteen years old. It will help you, too, to think the
same thoughts. A little kingdom I possess,
       Where thoughts and feelings dwell,
     And very hard I find the task
       Of governing it well;
     For passion tempts and troubles me,
       A wayward will misleads,
     And selfishness its shadow casts
       On all my words and deeds. How can I learn to rule myself,
       To be the child I should,
     Honest and brave, nor ever tire
       Of trying to be good? How can I keep a sunny soul
       To shine along life's way? How can I tune my little heart
       To sweetly sing all day? Dear Father, help me with the love
       That casteth out my fear,
     Teach me to lean on Thee, and feel
       That Thou art very near,
     That no temptation is unseen,
       No childish grief too small,
     Since Thou, with patience infinite,
       Doth soothe and comfort all. I do not ask for any crown
       But that which all may win,
     Nor seek to conquer any world,
       Except the one within. Be Thou my Guide until I find,
       Led by a tender hand,
     Thy happy kingdom in _myself_,
       And dare to take command. PICCOLA


     Poor, sweet Piccola! Did you hear
     What happened to Piccola, children dear? 'Tis seldom Fortune such favour grants
     As fell to this little maid of France. 'Twas Christmas-time, and her parents poor
     Could hardly drive the wolf from the door,
     Striving with poverty's patient pain
     Only to live till summer again. No gifts for Piccola! Sad were they
     When dawned the morning of Christmas-day;
     Their little darling no joy might stir,
     St Nicholas nothing would bring to her! But Piccola never doubted at all
     That something beautiful must befall
     Every child upon Christmas-day,
     And so she slept till the dawn was gray. And full of faith, when at last she woke,
     She stole to her shoe as the morning broke;
     Such sounds of gladness filled all the air,
     Twas plain St Nicholas had been there! In rushed Piccola sweet, half wild:
     Never was seen such a joyful child. "See what the good saint brought!" she cried,
     And mother and father must peep inside. Now such a story who ever heard? There was a little shivering bird! A sparrow, that in at the window flew,
     Had crept into Piccola's tiny shoe! "How good poor Piccola must have been!" She cried, as happy as any queen,
     While the starving sparrow she fed and warmed,
     And danced with rapture, she was so charmed. Children, this story I tell to you,
     Of Piccola sweet and her bird, is true. In the far-off land of France, they say,
     Still do they live to this very day. THE LITTLE FIR TREE


When I was a very little girl some one, probably my mother, read to me
Hans Christian Andersen's story of the Little Fir Tree. It happened that
I did not read it for myself or hear it again during my childhood. One
Christmas Day, when I was grown up, I found myself at a loss for the
"one more" story called for by some little children with whom I was
spending the holiday. In the mental search for buried treasure which
ensued, I came upon one or two word-impressions of the experiences of
the Little Fir Tree, and forthwith wove them into what I supposed to be
something of a reproduction of the original. The latter part of the
story had wholly faded from my memory, so that I "made up" to suit the
tastes of my audience. Afterward I told the story to a good many
children, at one time or another, and it gradually took the shape it has
here. It was not until several years later that, in rereading Andersen
for other purposes, I came upon the real story of the Little Fir Tree,
and read it for myself. Then indeed I was amused, and somewhat
distressed, to find how far I had wandered from the text. I give this explanation that the reader may know I do not presume to
offer the little tale which follows as an "adaptation" of Andersen's
famous story. I offer it plainly as a story which children have liked,
and which grew out of my early memories of Andersen's _The Little Fir
Tree_. Once there was a Little Fir Tree, slim and pointed, and shiny, which
stood in the great forest in the midst of some big fir trees, broad, and
tall, and shadowy green. The Little Fir Tree was very unhappy because he
was not big like the others. When the birds came flying into the woods
and lit on the branches of the big trees and built their nests there, he
used to call up to them,--

"Come down, come down, rest in my branches!" But they always said,--

"Oh, no, no; you are too little!" When the splendid wind came blowing and singing through the forest, it
bent and rocked and swung the tops of the big trees, and murmured to
them. Then the Little Fir Tree looked up, and called,--

"Oh, please, dear wind, come down and play with me!" But he always
said,--

"Oh, no; you are too little, you are too little!" In the winter the white snow fell softly, softly, and covered the great
trees all over with wonderful caps and coats of white. The Little Fir
Tree, close down in the cover of the others, would call up,--

"Oh, please, dear snow, give me a cap, too! I want to play, too!" But
the snow always said,--

"Oh no, no, no; you are too little, you are too little!" The worst of all was when men came into the wood, with sledges and teams
of horses. They came to cut the big trees down and carry them away. Whenever one had been cut down and carried away the others talked about
it, and nodded their heads, and the Little Fir Tree listened, and heard
them say that when you were carried away so, you might become the mast
of a mighty ship, and go far away over the ocean, and see many wonderful
things; or you might be part of a fine house in a great city, and see
much of life. The Little Fir Tree wanted greatly to see life, but he
was always too little; the men passed him by. But by and by, one cold winter's morning, men came with a sledge and
horses, and after they had cut here and there they came to the circle of
trees round the Little Fir Tree, and looked all about. "There are none little enough," they said. Oh! how the Little Fir Tree pricked up his needles! "Here is one," said one of the men, "it is just little enough." And he
touched the Little Fir Tree. The Little Fir Tree was happy as a bird, because he knew they were about
to cut him down. And when he was being carried away on the sledge he lay
wondering, _so_ contentedly, whether he should be the mast of a ship or
part of a fine city house. But when they came to the town he was taken
out and set upright in a tub and placed on the edge of a path in a row
of other fir trees, all small, but none so little as he. And then the
Little Fir Tree began to see life. People kept coming to look at the trees and to take them away. But
always when they saw the Little Fir Tree they shook their heads and
said,--

"It is too little, too little." Until, finally, two children came along, hand in hand, looking
carefully at all the small trees. When they saw the Little Fir Tree they
cried out,--

"We'll take this one; it is just little enough!" They took him out of his tub and carried him away, between them. And the
happy Little Fir Tree spent all his time wondering what it could be that
he was just little enough for; he knew it could hardly be a mast or a
house, since he was going away with children. He kept wondering, while they took him in through some big doors, and
set him up in another tub, on the table, in a bare little room. Very
soon they went away, and came back again with a big basket, which they
carried between them. Then some pretty ladies, with white caps on their
heads and white aprons over their blue dresses, came bringing little
parcels. The children took things out of the basket and began to play
with the Little Fir Tree, just as he had often begged the wind and the
snow and the birds to do. He felt their soft little touches on his head
and his twigs and his branches. When he looked down at himself, as far
as he could look, he saw that he was all hung with gold and silver
chains! There were strings of white fluffy stuff drooping around him;
his twigs held little gold nuts and pink, rosy balls and silver stars;
he had pretty little pink and white candles in his arms; but last, and
most wonderful of all, the children hung a beautiful white, floating
doll-angel over his head! The Little Fir Tree could not breathe, for joy
and wonder. What was it that he was, now? Why was this glory for him? After a time every one went away and left him. It grew dusk, and the
Little Fir Tree began to hear strange sounds through the closed doors. Sometimes he heard a child crying. He was beginning to be lonely. It
grew more and more shadowy. All at once, the doors opened and the two children came in. Two of the
pretty ladies were with them. They came up to the Little Fir Tree and
quickly lighted all the little pink and white candles. Then the two
pretty ladies took hold of the table with the Little Fir Tree on it and
pushed it, very smoothly and quickly, out of the doors, across a hall,
and in at another door. The Little Fir Tree had a sudden sight of a long room with many little
white beds in it, of children propped up on pillows in the beds, and of
other children in great wheeled chairs, and others hobbling about or
sitting in little chairs. He wondered why all the little children looked
so white and tired; he did not know that he was in a hospital. But
before he could wonder any more his breath was quite taken away by the
shout those little white children gave. "Oh! oh! m-m! m-m!" they cried. "How pretty! How beautiful! Oh, isn't it lovely!" He knew they must mean him, for all their shining eyes were looking
straight at him. He stood as straight as a mast, and quivered in every
needle, for joy. Presently one little weak child-voice called out,--

"It's the nicest Christmas tree I ever saw!" And then, at last, the Little Fir Tree knew what he was; he was a
Christmas tree! And from his shiny head to his feet he was glad, through
and through, because he was just little enough to be the nicest kind of
tree in the world! HOW MOSES WAS SAVED


Thousands of years ago, many years before David lived, there was a very
wise and good man of his people who was a friend and adviser of the king
of Egypt. And for love of this friend, the king of Egypt had let numbers
of the Israelites settle in his land. But after the king and his
Israelitish friend were dead, there was a new king, who hated the
Israelites. When he saw how strong they were, and how many there were of
them, he began to be afraid that some day they might number more than
the Egyptians, and might take his land from him. Then he and his rulers did a wicked thing. They made the Israelites
slaves. And they gave them terrible tasks to do, without proper rest, or
food, or clothes. For they hoped that the hardship would kill off the
Israelites. They thought the old men would die and the young men be so
ill and weary that they could not bring up families, and so the race
would dwindle away. But in spite of the work and suffering, the Israelites remained strong,
and more and more boys grew up, to make the king afraid. Then he did the most wicked thing of all. He ordered his soldiers to
kill every boy baby that should be born in an Israelitish family; he did
not care about the girls, because they could not grow up to fight. Very soon after this wicked order, a boy baby was born in a certain
Israelitish family. When his mother first looked at him her heart was
nearly broken, for he was even more beautiful than most babies are,--so
strong and fair and sweet. But he was a boy! How could she save him from
death? Somehow, she contrived to keep him hidden for three whole months. But at
the end of that time, she saw that it would not be possible to keep him
safe any longer. She had been thinking all this time about what she
should do, and now she carried out her plan. First, she took a basket made of bulrushes and daubed it all over with
pitch, so that it was water-tight, and then she laid the baby in it;
then she carried it to the edge of the river and laid it in the flags by
the river's brink. It did not show at all, unless one were quite near
it. Then she kissed her little son and left him there. But his sister
stood far off, not seeming to watch, but really watching carefully to
see what would happen to the baby. Soon there was the sound of talk and laughter, and a train of beautiful
women came down to the water's edge. It was the king's daughter, come
down to bathe in the river, with her maidens. The maidens walked along
by the river side. As the king's daughter came near to the water, she saw the strange
little basket lying in the flags, and she sent her maid to bring it to
her. And when she had opened it, she saw the child; the poor baby was
crying. When she saw him, so helpless and so beautiful, crying for his
mother, the king's daughter pitied him and loved him. She knew the cruel
order of her father, and she said at once, "This is one of the Hebrews'
children." At that moment the baby's sister came to the princess and said, "Shall I
go and find thee a nurse from the Hebrew women, so that she may nurse
the child for thee?" Not a word did she say about whose child it was,
but perhaps the princess guessed; I don't know. At all events, she told
the little girl to go. So the maiden went, and brought her mother! Then the king's daughter said to the baby's mother, "Take this child
away and nurse it for me, and I will give thee wages." Was not that a strange thing? And can you think how happy the baby's
mother was? For now the baby would be known only as the princess's
adopted child, and would be safe. And it was so. The mother kept him until he was old enough to be taken
to the princess's palace. Then he was brought and given to the king's
daughter, and he became her son. And she named him Moses. But the strangest part of the whole story is, that when Moses grew to be
a man he became so strong and wise that it was he who at last saved his
people from the king and rescued them from the Egyptians. The one child
saved by the king's own daughter was the very one the king would most
have wanted to kill, if he had known. THE TEN FAIRIES


Once upon a time there was a dear little girl, whose name was Elsa. Elsa's father and mother worked very hard and became rich. But they
loved Elsa so much that they did not like her to do any work; very
foolishly, they let her play all the time. So when Elsa grew up, she did
not know how to do anything; she could not make bread, she could not
sweep a room, she could not sew a seam; she could only laugh and sing. But she was so sweet and merry that everybody loved her. And by and by,
she married one of the people who loved her, and had a house of her own
to take care of. Then, then, my dears, came hard times for Elsa! There were so many
things to be done in the house, and she did not know how to do any of
them! And because she had never worked at all it made her very tired
even to try; she was tired before the morning was over, every day. The
maid would come and say, "How shall I do this?" or "How shall I do
that?" and Elsa would have to say, "I don't know." Then the maid would
pretend that she did not know, either; and when she saw her mistress
sitting about doing nothing, she, too, sat about, idle. Elsa's husband had a hard time of it; he had only poor food to eat, and
it was not ready at the right time, and the house looked all in a
muddle. It made him sad, and that made Elsa sad, for she wanted to do
everything just right. At last, one day, Elsa's husband went away quite cross; he said to her,
as he went out of the door, "It is no wonder that the house looks so,
when you sit all day with your hands in your lap!" Little Elsa cried bitterly when he was gone, for she did not want to
make her husband unhappy and cross, and she wanted the house to look
nice. "Oh, dear," she sobbed, "I wish I could do things right! I wish I
could work! I wish--I wish I had ten good fairies to work for me! Then I
could keep the house!" As she said the words, a great grey man stood before her; he was wrapped
in a strange grey cloak that covered him from head to foot; and he
smiled at Elsa. "What is the matter, dear?" he said. "Why do you cry?" "Oh, I am crying because I do not know how to keep the house," said
Elsa. "I cannot make bread, I cannot sweep, I cannot sew a seam; when I
was a little girl I never learned to work, and now I cannot do anything
right. I wish I had ten good fairies to help me!" "You shall have them, dear," said the grey man, and he shook his strange
grey cloak. Pouf! Out hopped ten tiny fairies, no bigger than that! "These shall be your servants, Elsa," said the grey man; "they are
faithful and clever, and they will do everything you want them to, just
right. But the neighbours might stare and ask questions if they saw
these little chaps running about your house, so I will hide them away
for you. Give me your little useless hands." Wondering, Elsa stretched out her pretty, little, white hands. "Now stretch out your little useless fingers, dear!" Elsa stretched out her pretty pink fingers. The grey man touched each one of the ten little fingers, and as he
touched them he said their names: "Little Thumb; Forefinger;
Thimble-finger; Ring-finger; Little Finger; Little Thumb; Forefinger;
Thimble-finger; Ring-finger; Little Finger!" And as he named the
fingers, one after another, the tiny fairies bowed their tiny heads;
there was a fairy for every name. "Hop! hide yourselves away!" said the grey man. Hop, hop! The fairies sprang to Elsa's knee, then to the palms of her
hands, and then--whisk! they were all hidden away in her little pink
fingers, a fairy in every finger! And the grey man was gone. Elsa sat and looked with wonder at her little white hands and the ten
useless fingers. But suddenly the little fingers began to stir. The tiny
fairies who were hidden away there were not used to remaining still, and
they were getting restless. They stirred so that Elsa jumped up and ran
to the cooking table, and took hold of the bread board. No sooner had
she touched the bread board than the little fairies began to work: they
measured the flour, mixed the bread, kneaded the loaves, and set them to
rise, quicker than you could wink; and when the bread was done, it was
as nice as you could wish. Then the little fairy-fingers seized the
broom, and in a twinkling they were making the house clean. And so it
went, all day. Elsa flew about from one thing to another, and the ten
fairies did the work, just right. When the maid saw her mistress working, she began to work, too; and when
she saw how beautifully everything was done, she was ashamed to do
anything badly herself. In a little while the housework was going
smoothly, and Elsa could laugh and sing again. There was no more crossness in that house. Elsa's husband grew so proud
of her that he went about saying to everybody, "My grandmother was a
fine housekeeper, and my mother was a fine housekeeper, but neither of
them could hold a candle to my wife. She has only one maid, but, to see
the work done, you would think she had as many servants as she has
fingers on her hands!" When Elsa heard that, she used to laugh, but she never, never told. THE ELVES AND THE SHOEMAKER


Once upon a time there was an honest shoemaker, who was very poor. He
worked as hard as he could, and still he could not earn enough to keep
himself and his wife. At last there came a day when he had nothing left
but one piece of leather, big enough to make one pair of shoes. He cut
out the shoes, ready to stitch, and left them on the bench; then he said
his prayers and went to bed, trusting that he could finish the shoes on
the next day and sell them. Bright and early the next morning, he rose and went to his work bench. There lay a pair of shoes, beautifully made, and the leather was gone! There was no sign of anyone having been there. The shoemaker and his
wife did not know what to make of it. But the first customer who came
was so pleased with the beautiful shoes that he bought them, and paid so
much that the shoemaker was able to buy leather enough for two pairs. Happily, he cut them out, and then, as it was late, he left the pieces
on the bench, ready to sew in the morning. But when morning came, two
pairs of shoes lay on the bench, most beautifully made, and no sign of
anyone who had been there. The shoemaker and his wife were quite at a
loss. That day a customer came and bought both pairs, and paid so much for
them that the shoemaker bought leather for four pairs, with the money. Once more he cut out the shoes and left them on the bench. And in the
morning all four pairs were made. It went on like this until the shoemaker and his wife were prosperous
people. But they could not be satisfied to have so much done for them
and not know to whom they should be grateful. So one night, after the
shoemaker had left the pieces of leather on the bench, he and his wife
hid themselves behind a curtain, and left a light in the room. Just as the clock struck twelve the door opened softly, and two tiny
elves came dancing into the room, hopped on to the bench, and began to
put the pieces together. They were quite naked, but they had wee little
scissors and hammers and thread. Tap! tap! went the little hammers;
stitch, stitch, went the thread, and the little elves were hard at work. No one ever worked so fast as they. In almost no time all the shoes were
stitched and finished. Then the tiny elves took hold of each other's
hands and danced round the shoes on the bench, till the shoemaker and
his wife had hard work not to laugh aloud. But as the clock struck two,
the little creatures whisked away out of the window, and left the room
all as it was before. The shoemaker and his wife looked at each other, and said, "How can we
thank the little elves who have made us happy and prosperous?" "I should like to make them some pretty clothes," said the wife, "they
are quite naked." "I will make the shoes if you will make the coats," said her husband. That very day they commenced their task. The wife cut out two tiny, tiny
coats of green, two weeny, weeny waistcoats of yellow, two little pairs
of trousers, of white, two bits of caps, bright red (for every one knows
the elves love bright colours), and her husband made two little pairs of
shoes with long, pointed toes. They made the wee clothes as dainty as
could be, with nice little stitches and pretty buttons; and by Christmas
time, they were finished. On Christmas eve, the shoemaker cleaned his bench, and on it, instead of
leather, he laid the two sets of gay little fairy-clothes. Then he and
his wife hid away as before, to watch. Promptly at midnight, the little naked elves came in. They hopped upon
the bench; but when they saw the little clothes there, they laughed and
danced for joy. Each one caught up his little coat and things and began
to put them on. Then they looked at each other and made all kinds of
funny motions in their delight. At last they began to dance, and when
the clock struck two, they danced quite away, out of the window. They never came back any more, but from that day they gave the shoemaker
and his wife good luck, so that they never needed any more help. WHO KILLED THE OTTER'S BABIES? Once the Otter came to the Mouse-deer and said, "Friend Mouse-deer, will
you please take care of my babies while I go to the river, to catch
fish?" "Certainly," said the Mouse-deer, "go along." But when the Otter came back from the river, with a string of fish, he
found his babies crushed flat. "What does this mean, Friend Mouse-deer?" he said. "Who killed my
children while you were taking care of them?" "I am very sorry," said the Mouse-deer, "but you know I am Chief Dancer
of the War-dance, and the Woodpecker came and sounded the war-gong, so I
danced. I forgot your children, and trod on them." "I shall go to King Solomon," said the Otter, "and you shall be
punished." Soon the Mouse-deer was called before King Solomon. "Did you kill the Otter's babies?" said the king. "Yes, your Majesty," said the Mouse-deer, "but I did not mean to." "How did it happen?" said the king. "Your Majesty knows," said the Mouse-deer, "that I am Chief Dancer of
the War-dance. The Woodpecker came and sounded the war-gong, and I had
to dance; and as I danced I trod on the Otter's children." "Send for the Woodpecker," said King Solomon. When the Woodpecker came,
he said to him, "Was it you who sounded the war-gong?" "Yes, your Majesty," said the Woodpecker, "but I had to." "Why?" said the king. "Your Majesty knows," said the Woodpecker, "that I am Chief Beater of
the War-gong, and I sounded the gong because I saw the Great Lizard
wearing his sword." "Send for the Great Lizard," said King Solomon. When the Great Lizard
came, he asked him, "Was it you who were wearing your sword?" "Yes, your Majesty," said the Great Lizard; "but I had to." "Why?" said the king. "Your Majesty knows," said the Great Lizard, "that I am Chief Protector
of the Sword. I wore my sword because the Tortoise came wearing his coat
of mail." So the Tortoise was sent for. "Why did you wear your coat of mail?" said the king. "I put it on, your Majesty," said the Tortoise, "because I saw the
King-crab trailing his three-edged pike." Then the King-crab was sent for. "Why were you trailing your three-edged pike?" said King Solomon. "Because, your Majesty," said the King-crab, "I saw that the Crayfish
had shouldered his lance." Immediately the Crayfish was sent for. "Why did you shoulder your lance?" said the king. "Because, your Majesty," said the Crayfish, "I saw the Otter coming down
to the river to kill my children." "Oh," said King Solomon, "if that is the case, the Otter killed the
Otter's children. And the Mouse-deer cannot be blamed, by the law of the
land!" EARLY


     I like to lie and wait to see
       My mother braid her hair. It is as long as it can be,
       And yet she doesn't care. I love my mother's hair. And then the way her fingers go;
       They look so quick and white,--
     In and out, and to and fro,
       And braiding in the light,
     And it is always right. So then she winds it, shiny brown,
     Around her head into a crown,
       Just like the day before. And then she looks and pats it down,
       And looks a minute more;
     While I stay here all still and cool. Oh, isn't morning beautiful? THE BRAHMIN, THE TIGER, AND THE JACKAL


Do you know what a Brahmin is? A Brahmin is a very good and gentle kind
of man who lives in India, and who treats all the beasts as if they were
his brothers. There is a great deal more to know about Brahmins, but
that is enough for the story. One day a Brahmin was walking along a country road when he came upon a
Tiger, shut up in a strong iron cage. The villagers had caught him and
shut him up there for his wickedness. "Oh, Brother Brahmin, Brother Brahmin," said the Tiger, "please let me
out, to get a little drink! I am so thirsty, and there is no water
here." "But Brother Tiger," said the Brahmin, "you know if I should let you
out, you would spring on me and eat me up." "Never, Brother Brahmin!" said the Tiger. "Never in the world would I do
such an ungrateful thing! Just let me out a little minute, to get a
little, little drink of water, Brother Brahmin!" So the Brahmin unlocked the door and let the Tiger out. The moment he
was out he sprang on the Brahmin, and was about to eat him up. "But, Brother Tiger," said the Brahmin, "you promised you would not. It
is not fair or just that you should eat me, when I set you free." "It is perfectly right and just," said the Tiger, "and I shall eat you
up." However, the Brahmin argued so hard that at last the Tiger agreed to
wait and ask the first five whom they should meet, whether it was fair
for him to eat the Brahmin, and to abide by their decision. The first thing they came to, to ask, was an old Banyan Tree, by the
wayside. (A banyan tree is a kind of fruit tree.) "Brother Banyan," said the Brahmin, eagerly, "does it seem to you right
or just that this Tiger should eat me, when I set him free from his
cage?" The Banyan Tree looked down at them and spoke in a tired voice. "In the summer," he said, "when the sun is hot, men come and sit in the
cool of my shade and refresh themselves with the fruit of my branches. But when evening falls, and they are rested, they break my twigs and
scatter my leaves, and stone my boughs for more fruit. Men are an
ungrateful race. Let the Tiger eat the Brahmin." The Tiger sprang to eat the Brahmin, but the Brahmin said,--

"Wait, wait; we have asked only one. We have still four to ask." Presently they came to a place where an old Bullock was lying by the
road. The Brahmin went up to him and said,--

"Brother Bullock, oh, Brother Bullock, does it seem to you a fair thing
that this Tiger should eat me up, after I have just freed him from a
cage?" The Bullock looked up, and answered in a deep, grumbling voice,--

"When I was young and strong my master used me hard, and I served him
well. I carried heavy loads and carried them far. Now that I am old and
weak and cannot work, he leaves me without food or water, to die by the
wayside. Men are a thankless lot. Let the Tiger eat the Brahmin." The Tiger sprang, but the Brahmin spoke very quickly,--

"Oh, but this is only the second, Brother Tiger; you promised to ask
five." The Tiger grumbled a good deal, but at last he went on again with the
Brahmin. And after a time they saw an Eagle, high overhead. The Brahmin
called up to him imploringly,--

"Oh, Brother Eagle, Brother Eagle! Tell us if it seems to you fair that
this Tiger should eat me up, when I have just saved him from a frightful
cage?" The Eagle soared slowly overhead a moment, then he came lower, and spoke
in a thin, clear voice. "I live high in the air," he said, "and I do no man any harm. Yet as
often as they find my eyrie, men stone my young and rob my nest and
shoot at me with arrows. Men are a cruel breed. Let the Tiger eat the
Brahmin!" The Tiger sprang upon the Brahmin, to eat him up; and this time the
Brahmin had very hard work to persuade him to wait. At last he did
persuade him, however, and they walked on together. And in a little
while they saw an old Alligator, lying half buried in mud and slime, at
the river's edge. "Brother Alligator, oh, Brother Alligator!" said the Brahmin, "does it
seem at all right or fair to you that this Tiger should eat me up, when
I have just now let him out of a cage?" The old Alligator turned in the mud, and grunted, and snorted; then he
said,--

"I lie here in the mud all day, as harmless as a pigeon; I hunt no man,
yet every time a man sees me, he throws stones at me, and pokes me with
sharp sticks, and jeers at me. Men are a worthless lot. Let the Tiger
eat the Brahmin!" At this the Tiger was going to eat the Brahmin at once. The poor Brahmin
had to remind him, again and again, that they had asked only four. "Wait till we've asked one more! Wait until we see a fifth!" he begged. Finally, the Tiger walked on with him. After a time, they met the little Jackal, coming gaily down the road
toward them. "Oh, Brother Jackal, dear Brother Jackal," said the Brahmin, "give us
your opinion! Do you think it right or fair that this Tiger should eat
me, when I set him free from a terrible cage?" "Beg pardon?" said the little Jackal. "I said," said the Brahmin, raising his voice, "do you think it is fair
that the Tiger should eat me, when I set him free from his cage?" "Cage?" said the little Jackal, vacantly. "Yes, yes, his cage," said the Brahmin. "We want your opinion. Do you
think----"

"Oh," said the little Jackal, "you want my opinion? Then may I beg you
to speak a little more loudly, and make the matter quite clear? I am a
little slow of understanding. Now what was it?" "Do you think," said the Brahmin, "it is right for this Tiger to eat me,
when I set him free from his cage?" "What cage?" said the little Jackal. "Why, the cage he was in," said the Brahmin. "You see----"

"But I don't altogether understand," said the little Jackal. "You 'set
him free,' you say?" "Yes, yes, yes!" said the Brahmin. "It was this way: I was walking
along, and I saw the Tiger----"

"Oh, dear, dear!" interrupted the little Jackal; "I never can see
through it, if you go on like that, with a long story. If you really
want my opinion you must make the matter clear. What sort of cage was
it?" "Why, a big, ordinary cage, an iron cage," said the Brahmin. "That gives me no idea at all," said the little Jackal. "See here, my
friends, if we are to get on with this matter you'd best show me the
spot. Then I can understand in a jiffy. Show me the cage." So the Brahmin, the Tiger, and the little Jackal walked back together to
the spot where the cage was. "Now, let us understand the situation," said the little Jackal. "Friend
Brahmin, where were you?" "I stood just here by the roadside," said the Brahmin. "Tiger, and where were you?" said the little Jackal. "Why, in the cage, of course," roared the Tiger. "Oh, I beg your pardon, Father Tiger," said the little Jackal, "I
really am _so_ stupid; I cannot _quite_ understand what happened. If you
will have a little patience,--_how_ were you in the cage? What position
were you in?" "I stood here," said the Tiger, leaping into the cage, "with my head
over my shoulder, so." "Oh, thank you, thank you," said the little Jackal, "that makes it
_much_ clearer; but I still don't _quite_ understand--forgive my slow
mind--why did you not come out, by yourself?" "Can't you see that the door shut me in?" said the Tiger. "Oh, I do beg your pardon," said the little Jackal. "I know I am very
slow; I can never understand things well unless I see just how they
were; if you could show me now exactly how that door works I am sure I
could understand. How does it shut?" "It shuts like this," said the Brahmin, pushing it to. "Yes; but I don't see any lock," said the little Jackal, "does it lock
on the outside?" "It locks like this," said the Brahmin. And he shut and bolted the door! "Oh, does it, indeed?" said the little Jackal. "Does it, _indeed_! Well,
Brother Brahmin, now that it is locked, I should advise you to let it
stay locked! As for you, my friend," he said to the Tiger, "I think you
will wait a good while before you'll find anyone to let you out again!" Then he made a very low bow to the Brahmin. "Good-bye, Brother," he said. "Your way lies that way, and mine lies
this; good-bye!" THE LITTLE JACKAL AND THE CAMEL


All these stories about the little Jackal that I have told you, show how
clever the little Jackal was. But you know--if you don't, you will when
you are grown up--that no matter how clever you are, sooner or later you
surely meet some one who is more clever. It is always so in life. And it
was so with the little Jackal. This is what happened. The little Jackal was, as you know, exceedingly fond of shell-fish,
especially of river crabs. Now there came a time when he had eaten all
the crabs to be found on his own side of the river. He knew there must
be plenty on the other side, if he could only get to them, but he could
not swim. One day he thought of a plan. He went to his friend the Camel, and
said,--

"Friend Camel, I know a spot where the sugar-cane grows thick; I'll show
you the way, if you will take me there." "Indeed I will," said the Camel, who was very fond of sugar-cane. "Where
is it?" "It is on the other side of the river," said the little Jackal; "but we
can manage it nicely, if you will take me on your back and swim over." The Camel was perfectly willing, so the little Jackal jumped on his
back, and the Camel swam across the river, carrying him. When they were
safely over, the little Jackal jumped down and showed the Camel the
sugar-cane field; then he ran swiftly along the river bank, to hunt for
crabs; the Camel began to eat sugar-cane. He ate happily, and noticed
nothing around him. Now, you know, a Camel is very big, and a Jackal is very little. Consequently, the little Jackal had eaten his fill by the time the Camel
had barely taken a mouthful. The little Jackal had no mind to wait for
his slow friend; he wanted to be off home again, about his business. So
he ran round and round the sugar-cane field, and as he ran he sang and
shouted, and made a great hullabaloo. Of course, the villagers heard him at once. "There is a Jackal in the sugar-cane," they said; "he will dig holes and
destroy the roots; we must go down and drive him out." So they came
down, with sticks and stones. When they got there, there was no Jackal
to be seen; but they saw the great Camel, eating away at the juicy
sugar-cane. They ran at him and beat him, and stoned him, and drove him
away half dead. When they had gone, leaving the poor Camel half killed, the little
Jackal came dancing back from somewhere or other. "I think it's time to go home, now," he said; "don't you?" "Well, you _are_ a pretty friend!" said the Camel. "The idea of your
making such a noise, with your shouting and singing! You brought this
upon me. What in the world made you do it? Why did you shout and sing?" "Oh, I don't know _why_" said the little Jackal,--"I always sing after
dinner!" "So?" said the Camel. "Ah, very well, let us go home now." He took the little Jackal kindly on his back and started into the water. When he began to swim he swam out to where the river was the very
deepest. There he stopped, and said,--

"Oh, Jackal!" "Yes," said the little Jackal. "I have the strangest feeling," said the Camel,--"I feel as if I must
roll over." "'Roll over'!" cried the Jackal. "My goodness, don't do that! If you do
that, you'll drown me! What in the world makes you want to do such a
crazy thing? Why should you want to roll over?" "Oh, I don't know _why_," said the Camel slowly, "but I always roll over
after dinner!" So he rolled over. And the little Jackal was drowned, for his sins, but the Camel came
safely home. THE GULLS OF SALT LAKE


The story I am going to tell you is about something that really
happened, many years ago. A brave little company of pioneers from the Atlantic coast crossed the
Mississippi River and journeyed across the plains of Central North
America in big covered wagons with many horses, and finally succeeded in
climbing to the top of the great Rockies and down again into a valley in
the very midst of the mountains. It was a valley of brown, bare, desert
soil, in a climate where almost no rain falls; but the snow on the
mountain-tops sent down little streams of pure water, the winds were
gentle, and lying like a blue jewel at the foot of the western hills was
a marvellous lake of salt water,--an inland sea. So the pioneers settled
there and built themselves huts and cabins for the first winter. It had taken them many months to make the terrible journey; many had
died of weariness and illness on the way; many died of hardship during
the winter; and the provisions they had brought in their wagons were so
nearly gone that, by spring, they were living partly on roots, dug from
the ground. All their lives now depended on the crops of grain and
vegetables which they could raise in the valley. They made the barren
land fertile by spreading water from the little streams over it,--what
we call "irrigating"; and they planted enough corn and grain and
vegetables for all the people. Every one helped, and every one watched
for the sprouting, with hopes, and prayers, and careful eyes. In good time the seeds sprouted, and the dry, brown earth was covered
with a carpet of tender, green, growing things. No farmer's garden could
have looked better than the great garden of the desert valley. And from
day to day the little shoots grew and flourished till they were all well
above the ground. Then a terrible thing happened. One day, the men who were watering the
crops saw a great number of crickets swarming over the ground at the
edge of the gardens nearest the mountains. They were hopping from the
barren places into the young, green crops, and as they settled down they
ate the tiny shoots and leaves to the ground. More came, and more, and
ever more, and as they came they spread out till they covered a big
corner of the grain field. And still more and more, till it was like an
army of black, hopping, crawling crickets, streaming down the side of
the mountain to kill the crops. The men tried to kill the crickets by beating them down, but the
numbers were so great that it was like beating at the sea. Then they ran
and told the terrible news, and all the village came to help. They
started fires; they dug trenches and filled them with water; they ran
wildly about in the fields, killing what they could. But while they
fought in one place new armies of crickets marched down the
mountain-sides and attacked the fields in other places. And at last the
people fell on their knees and wept and cried in despair, for they saw
starvation and death in the fields. A few knelt to pray. Others gathered round and joined them, weeping. More left their useless struggles and knelt beside their neighbours. At
last nearly all the people were kneeling on the desolate fields praying
for deliverance from the plague of crickets. Suddenly, from far off in the air toward the great salt lake, there was
the sound of flapping wings. It grew louder. Some of the people looked
up, startled. They saw, like a white cloud rising from the lake, a flock
of sea gulls flying toward them. Snow-white in the sun, with great wings
beating and soaring, in hundreds and hundreds, they rose and circled and
came on. "The gulls! the gulls!" was the cry. "What does it mean?" The gulls flew overhead, with a shrill chorus of whimpering cries, and
then, in a marvellous white cloud of outspread wings and hovering
breasts, they settled down over the cultivated ground. "Oh! woe! woe!" cried the people. "The gulls are eating what the
crickets have left! they will strip root and branch!" But all at once, someone called out,--

"No, no! See! they are eating the crickets! They are eating only the
crickets!" It was true. The gulls devoured the crickets in dozens, in hundreds, in
swarms. They ate until they were gorged, and then they flew heavily back
to the lake, only to come again with new appetite. And when at last they
finished, they had stripped the fields of the army of crickets; and the
people were saved. To this day, in the beautiful city of Salt Lake, which grew out of that
pioneer village, the little children are taught to love the sea gulls. And when they learn drawing and weaving in the schools, their first
design is often a picture of a cricket and a gull. THE NIGHTINGALE


A long, long time ago, as long ago as when there were fairies, there
lived an emperor in China, who had a most beautiful palace, all made of
crystal. Outside the palace was the loveliest garden in the whole world,
and farther away was a forest where the trees were taller than any other
trees in the world, and farther away, still, was a deep wood. And in
this wood lived a little Nightingale. The Nightingale sang so
beautifully that everybody who heard her remembered her song better than
anything else that he heard or saw. People came from all over the world
to see the crystal palace and the wonderful garden and the great forest;
but when they went home and wrote books about these things they always
wrote, "But the Nightingale is the best of all." At last it happened that the Emperor came upon a book which said this,
and he at once sent for his Chamberlain. "Who is this Nightingale?" said the Emperor. "Why have I never heard him
sing?" The Chamberlain, who was a very important person, said, "There cannot be
any such person; I have never heard his name." "The book says there is a Nightingale," said the Emperor. "I command
that the Nightingale be brought here to sing for me this evening." The Chamberlain went out and asked all the great lords and ladies and
pages where the Nightingale could be found, but not one of them had ever
heard of him. So the Chamberlain went back to the Emperor and said,
"There is no such person." "The book says there is a Nightingale," said the Emperor; "if the
Nightingale is not here to sing for me this evening I will have the
court trampled upon, immediately after supper." The Chamberlain did not want to be trampled upon, so he ran out and
asked everybody in the palace about the Nightingale. At last, a little
girl who worked in the kitchen to help the cook, said, "Oh, yes, I know
the Nightingale very well. Every night, when I go to carry scraps from
the kitchen to my mother, who lives in the wood beyond the forest, I
hear the Nightingale sing." The Chamberlain asked the maid to take him to the Nightingale's home,
and many of the lords and ladies followed after. When they had gone a
little way, they heard a cow moo. "Ah!" said the lords and ladies, "that must be the Nightingale; what a
large voice for so small a creature!" "Oh, no," said the little girl, "that is just a cow, mooing." A little farther on they heard some bullfrogs, in a swamp. "Surely that
is the Nightingale," said the courtiers; "it really sounds like
church-bells!" "Oh, no," said the little girl, "those are bullfrogs, croaking." At last they came to the wood where the Nightingale was. "Hush!" said
the little girl, "she is going to sing." And, sure enough, the little
Nightingale began to sing. She sang so beautifully that you have never
in all your life heard anything like it. "Dear, dear," said the courtiers, "that is very pleasant; does that
little grey bird really make all that noise? She is so pale that I think
she has lost her colour for fear of us." The Chamberlain asked the little Nightingale to come and sing for the
Emperor. The little Nightingale said she could sing better in her own
greenwood, but she was so sweet and kind that she came with them. That evening the palace was all trimmed with the most beautiful flowers
you can imagine, and rows and rows of little silver bells, that tinkled
when the wind blew in, and hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of wax
candles, that shone like tiny stars. In the great hall there was a gold
perch for the Nightingale, beside the Emperor's throne. When all the people were there, the Emperor asked the Nightingale to
sing. Then the little grey Nightingale filled her throat full, and sang. And, my dears, she sang so beautifully that the Emperor's eyes filled up
with tears! And, you know, emperors do not cry at all easily. So he
asked her to sing again, and this time she sang so marvellously that
the tears came out of his eyes and ran down his cheeks. That was a great
success. They asked the little Nightingale to sing, over and over again,
and when they had listened enough the Emperor said that she should be
made "Singer in Chief to the Court." She was to have a golden perch near
the Emperor's bed, and a little golden cage, and was to be allowed to go
out twice every day. But there were twelve servants appointed to wait on
her, and those twelve servants went with her every time she went out,
and each of the twelve had hold of the end of a silken string which was
tied to the little Nightingale's leg! It was not so very much fun to go
out that way! For a long, long time the Nightingale sang every evening to the Emperor
and his court, and they liked her so much that the ladies all tried to
sing like her; they used to put water in their mouths and then make
little sounds like this: _glu-glu-glug_. And when the courtiers met each
other in the halls, one would say "Night," and the other would say
"ingale," and that was supposed to be conversation. At last, one day, there came a little package to the Emperor, on the
outside of which was written, "The Nightingale." Inside was an
artificial bird, something like a Nightingale, only it was made of gold,
and silver, and rubies, and emeralds, and diamonds. When it was wound
up it played a waltz tune, and as it played it moved its little tail up
and down. Everybody in the court was filled with delight at the music of
the new nightingale. They made it sing that same tune thirty-three
times, and still they had not had enough. They would have made it sing
the tune thirty-four times, but the Emperor said, "I should like to hear
the real Nightingale sing, now." But when they looked about for the real little Nightingale, they could
not find her anywhere! She had taken the chance, while everybody was
listening to the waltz tunes, to fly away through the window to her own
greenwood. "What a very ungrateful bird!" said the lords and ladies. "But it does
not matter; the new nightingale is just as good." So the artificial nightingale was given the real Nightingale's little
gold perch, and every night the Emperor wound her up, and she sang waltz
tunes to him. The people in the court liked her even better than the old
Nightingale, because they could all whistle her tunes,--which you can't
do with real nightingales. About a year after the artificial nightingale came, the Emperor was
listening to her waltz tune, when there was a _snap_ and _whir-r-r_
inside the bird, and the music stopped. The Emperor ran to his doctor,
but he could not do anything. Then he ran to his clock-maker, but he
could not do much. Nobody could do much. The best they could do was to
patch the gold nightingale up so that it could sing once a year; even
that was almost too much, and the tune was very shaky. Still, the
Emperor kept the gold nightingale on the perch in his own room. A long time went by, and then, at last, the Emperor grew very ill, and
was about to die. When it was sure that he could not live much longer,
the people chose a new emperor and waited for the old one to die. The
poor Emperor lay, quite cold and pale, in his great big bed, with velvet
curtains and tall candlesticks all about. He was quite alone, for all
the courtiers had gone to congratulate the new emperor, and all the
servants had gone to talk it over. When the Emperor woke up, he felt a terrible weight on his chest. He
opened his eyes, and there was Death, sitting on his heart. Death had
put on the Emperor's gold crown, and he had the gold sceptre in one
hand, and the silken banner in the other; and he looked at the Emperor
with his great hollow eyes. The room was full of shadows, and the
shadows were full of faces. Everywhere the Emperor looked, there were
faces. Some were very, very ugly, and some were sweet and lovely; they
were all the things the Emperor had done in his life, good and bad. And
as he looked at them they began to whisper. They whispered, "_Do you
remember this?_" "_Do you remember that?_" The Emperor remembered so
much that he cried out loud, "Oh, bring the great drum! Make music, so
that I may not hear these dreadful whispers!" But there was nobody there
to bring the drum. Then the Emperor cried, "You little gold nightingale, can you not sing
something for me? I have given you gifts of gold and jewels, and kept
you always by my side; will you not help me now?" But there was nobody
to wind the little gold nightingale up, and of course it could not sing. The Emperor's heart grew colder and colder where Death crouched upon it,
and the dreadful whispers grew louder and louder, and the Emperor's life
was almost gone. Suddenly, through the open window, there came a most
lovely song. It was so sweet and so loud that the whispers died quite
away. Presently the Emperor felt his heart grow warm, then he felt the
blood flow through his limbs again; he listened to the song until the
tears ran down his cheeks; he knew that it was the little real
Nightingale who had flown away from him when the gold nightingale came. Death was listening to the song, too; and when it was done and the
Emperor begged for more, Death, too, said, "Please sing again, little
Nightingale!" "Will you give me the Emperor's gold crown for a song?" said the little
Nightingale. "Yes," said Death; and the little Nightingale bought the Emperor's crown
for a song. "Oh, sing again, little Nightingale," begged Death. "Will you give me the Emperor's sceptre for another song?" said the
little grey Nightingale. "Yes," said Death; and the little Nightingale bought the Emperor's
sceptre for another song. Once more Death begged for a song, and this time the little Nightingale
obtained the banner for her singing. Then she sang one more song, so
sweet and so sad that it made Death think of his garden in the
churchyard, where he always liked best to be. And he rose from the
Emperor's heart and floated away through the window. When Death was gone, the Emperor said to the little Nightingale, "Oh,
dear little Nightingale, you have saved me from Death! Do not leave me
again. Stay with me on this little gold perch, and sing to me always!" "No, dear Emperor," said the little Nightingale, "I sing best when I am
free; I cannot live in a palace. But every night when you are quite
alone, I will come and sit in the window and sing to you, and tell you
everything that goes on in your kingdom: I will tell you where the poor
people are who ought to be helped, and where the wicked people are who
ought to be punished. Only, dear Emperor, be sure that you never let
anybody know that you have a little bird who tells you everything." After the little Nightingale had flown away, the Emperor felt so well
and strong that he dressed himself in his royal robes and took his gold
sceptre in his hand. And when the courtiers came in to see if he were
dead, there stood the Emperor with his sword in one hand and his sceptre
in the other, and said, "Good-morning!" MARGERY'S GARDEN


There was once a little girl named Margery, who had always lived in the
city. The flat where her mother and father lived was at the top of a big
building, and you couldn't see a great deal from the windows, except
chimney-pots on other people's roofs. Margery did not know much about
trees and flowers, but she loved them dearly; whenever it was a fine
Sunday she used to go with her mother and father to the park and look at
the lovely flower-beds. They seemed always to be finished, though, and
Margery was always wishing she could see them grow. One spring, when Margery was nine, her father obtained a new situation
and they removed to a little house with a nice big piece of ground a
short distance outside the town where his new position was. Margery was
delighted. And the very first thing she said, when her father told her
about it, was, "Oh, may I have a garden? _May_ I have a garden?" Margery's mother was almost as eager for a garden as she was, and
Margery's father said he expected to live on their vegetables all the
rest of his life! So it was soon agreed that the garden should be the
first thing attended to. Behind the cottage were apple trees, a plum tree, and two or three pear
trees; then came a stretch of rough grass, and then a stone wall, with a
gate leading into the fields. It was on the grass plot that the garden
was to be. A big piece was to be used for wheat and peas and beans, and
a little piece at the end was to be given to Margery. "What shall we have in it?" asked her mother. "Flowers," said Margery, with shining eyes,--"blue, and white, and
yellow, and pink,--every kind of flower!" "Surely, flowers," said her mother, "and shall we not have a little
salad garden in the middle?" "What is a salad garden?" Margery asked. "It is a garden where you have all the things that make nice salad,"
said her mother, laughing, for Margery was fond of salads; "you have
lettuce, and endive, and mustard and cress, and parsley, and radishes,
and beetroot, and young onions." "Oh! how good it sounds!" said Margery. "I should love a salad garden." That very evening, Margery's father took pencil and paper, and drew out
a plan for her garden; first, they talked it all over, then he drew what
they decided on; it looked like the diagram on the next page. "The outside strip is for flowers," said Margery's father, "and next is
a footpath, all the way round the beds; that is to let you get at the
flowers to weed and to pick; there is a wider path through the middle,
and the rest is for rows of salad vegetables." "Papa, it is glorious!" said Margery. Papa laughed. "I hope you will still think it glorious when the weeding
time comes," he said, "for you know, you and mother have promised to
take care of this garden, while I take care of the big one." "I wouldn't _not_ take care of it for anything!" said Margery. "I want
to feel that it is my very own." [Illustration]

Her father kissed her, and said it was certainly her "very own." Two evenings after that, when Margery was called in from her first
ramble in the fields, she found the postman at the door. "Something for you, Margery," said her mother, with the look she had
when something nice was happening. It was a box, quite a big box, with a label on it that said:--

     MISS MARGERY BROWN,
         PRIMROSE COTTAGE,
               21 NARCISSUS ROAD,
                     COLCHESTER. From Seeds and Plants Company, Reading. Margery could hardly wait to open it. It was filled with little
packages, all with printed labels; and in the packages, of course, were
seeds. It made Margery dance, just to read the names,--nasturtium, giant
helianthus, canariensis, calendula, Canterbury bells: more names than I
can tell you; and other packages, bigger, that said, "Sweet Peas,"
"French beans," "Carrots," "Wallflowers," and such things! Margery could
almost smell the posies, she was so excited. Only, she had seen so
little of flowers that she did not know what all the names meant. She
did not know that a helianthus was a sunflower until her mother told her
so, and she had never seen the dear, blue, bell-shaped flowers that
always grow in old-fashioned gardens, and are called Canterbury bells. She thought the calendula must be a strange, grand flower, by its name;
but her mother told her it was the gay, sturdy, everydayish little
flower called a marigold. There was a great deal for a little city girl
to be surprised about, and it did seem as if morning was a long way off! "Did you think you could plant them in the morning?" asked her mother. "You know, dear, the ground has to be made ready first; it takes a
little time,--it may be several days before you can plant." That was another surprise. Margery had thought she could begin to sow
the seed right off. But this was what had happened. Early the next morning, a man came
driving up to the cottage with two strong white horses; in his wagon was
a plough. I suppose you have seen ploughs, but Margery never had, and
she watched with great interest, while the man and her father took the
plough from the cart and harnessed the horses to it. It was a great,
three-cornered piece of sharp steel, with long handles coming up from
it, so that a man could hold it in place. It looked like this:--

[Illustration]

"I brought a two-horse plough because it's virgin soil," the man said. Margery wondered what in the world he meant; it had not been
cultivated, of course, but what had that do with the kind of plough? "What does he mean, father?" she whispered, when she got a chance. "He
means that this land has not been ploughed before; it will be hard to
turn the soil, and one horse could not pull the plough," said her
father. It took the man two hours to plough the little strip of land. He drove
the sharp end of the plough into the soil, and held it firmly so, while
the horses drew it along in a straight line. Margery found it
fascinating to watch the long line of dark earth and green grass come
rolling up and turn over, as the knife passed it. She could see that it
took real skill and strength to keep the line even, and to avoid the
stones. Sometimes the plough struck a hidden stone, and then the man was
jerked almost off his feet. But he only laughed, and said, "Tough piece
of land; it will be a lot better next year." When he had ploughed, the man went back to his cart and unloaded another
farm implement. This one was like a three-cornered platform of wood,
with a long, curved, strong rake under it. It was called a harrow, and
it looked like the diagram on the next page. The man harnessed the horses to it, and then he stood on the platform
and drove all over the strip of land. It was fun to watch, but perhaps
it was a little hard to do. The man's weight kept the harrow steady,
and let the teeth of the rake scratch and cut the ground up, so that it
did not stay in ridges. "He scrambles the ground, father!" said Margery. "It needs 'scrambling,'" laughed her father. "We are going to get more
weeds than we want on this fresh soil, and the more the ground is
broken, the fewer there will be." [Illustration]

After the ploughing and harrowing, the man drove off, and Margery's
father said that he himself would do the rest of the work in the late
afternoons, when he came home from business; they could not afford too
much help, he said, and he had learned to take care of a garden when he
was a boy. So Margery did not see any more done until the next day. But the next day there was hard work for Margery's father! Every bit of
that ground had to be broken up still more with a spade, and then the
clods which were full of grass-roots had to be taken on a fork and
shaken, till the earth fell out; when the grass was thrown to one side. That would not have had to be done if the land had been ploughed in the
autumn; the grass would have rotted in the ground, and would have made
food for the plants. Now, Margery's father put the fertiliser on the
top, and then raked it into the earth. At last, it was time to make the place for the seeds. Margery and her
mother helped. Father tied one end of a cord to a little stake, and
drove the stake in the ground at one end of the garden. Then he took the
cord to the other end of the garden and pulled it tight, tied it to
another stake, and drove that down. That made a straight line. Then he
hoed a trench, a few inches deep, the whole length of the cord, and
scattered fertiliser in it. Pretty soon the whole garden was lined with
little trenches. "Now for the seed," said father. Margery ran and brought the seed box. "May I help?" she asked. "If you watch me sow one row, I think you can do the next," said her
father. So Margery watched. Her father took a handful of peas, and, stooping,
walked slowly along the line, letting the seed trickle through his
fingers. It was pretty to watch; it made Margery think of a photograph
her teacher had, a photograph of a famous picture called "The Sower." Perhaps you have seen it. Putting in the seed was not so easy to do as to watch; sometimes Margery
dropped in too much, and sometimes not enough; but her father was
patient with her, and soon she did better. They planted peas, beans, spinach, carrots, and parsnips. And Margery's
father made a row of holes, after that, for the tomato plants. He said
those had to be transplanted; they could not be sown from seed. When the seeds were in the trenches they had to be covered up, and
Margery really helped at that. It is fun to do it. You stand beside the
little trench and walk backward, and as you walk you hoe the loose earth
back over the seeds; the same earth that was hoed up you pull back
again. Then you rake very gently over the surface, with the back of a
rake, to even it all off. Margery liked it, because now the garden began
to look _like_ a garden. But best of all was the work next day, when her own little particular
garden was begun. Father Brown loved Margery and Margery's mother so
much that he wanted their garden to be perfect, and that meant a great
deal more work. He knew very well that the old grass would begin to come
through again on such soil, and that it would make terribly hard
weeding. He was not going to have any such thing for his two "little
girls," as he called them. So he gave that little garden particular
attention. This is what he did. After he had thrown out all the turf, he shovelled clean earth on to the
garden,--as much as three solid inches of it; not a bit of grass was in
that. Then it was ready for raking and fertilising, and for the lines. The little footpaths were marked out by Father Brown's feet; Margery and
her mother laughed well at his actions, for it looked like some kind of
dance. Mr Brown had seen gardeners do it when he was a little boy, and
he did it very nicely: he walked along the sides of the square, with one
foot turned a little out, and the other straight, taking such tiny steps
that his feet touched each other all the time. This tramped out a path
just wide enough for a person to walk. The wider path was marked with lines and raked. Margery thought, of course, all the flowers would be put in as the
vegetables were; but she found that it was not so. For some, her father
poked little holes with his finger; for some, he made very shallow
trenches; and some very small seeds were scattered lightly over the top
of the ground. Margery and her mother had taken so much pains in thinking out the
arrangement of the flowers, that perhaps you will like to hear just how
they designed that garden. At the back were the sweet peas, which would
grow tall, like a screen; on the two sides, for a kind of hedge, were
yellow sunflowers; and along the front edge were the gay nasturtiums. Margery planned that, so that she could look into the garden from the
front, but have it shut away from the vegetable patch by the tall
flowers on the sides. The two front corners had canariensis in them. Canariensis is a pretty creeper with golden blossoms, very dainty and
bright. And then, in little square patches all round the garden, were
planted London pride, blue bachelor's buttons, yellow marigolds, tall
larkspur, many-coloured asters, hollyhocks and stocks. All these lovely
flowers used to grow in our grandmothers' gardens, and if you don't know
what they look like, I hope you can find out next summer. Between the flowers and the middle path went the seeds for that
wonderful salad garden; all the things Mrs Brown had named to Margery
were there. Margery had never seen anything more wonderful than the
little round lettuce-seeds. They were so tiny that it did not seem
possible that green lettuce leaves could come from them. But they surely
would. Mother and father and Margery were late to supper that evening. But they
were all so happy that it did not matter. The last thing Margery
thought of, as she went to sleep at night, was the dear, smooth little
garden, with its funny footpath, and with the little sticks standing at
the ends of the rows, labelled "lettuce," "beets," "helianthus," and so
on. "I have a garden! I have a garden!" was Margery's last thought as she
went off to dreamland. THE LITTLE COTYLEDONS


This is another story about Margery's garden. The next morning after the garden was planted, Margery was up and out at
six o'clock. She could not wait to look at her garden. To be sure, she
knew that the seeds could not sprout in a single night, but she had a
feeling that _something_ might happen at any moment. The garden was just
as smooth and brown as the night before, and no little seedlings were in
sight. But a very few mornings after that, when Margery went out, she saw a
funny little crack opening up through the earth, the whole length of the
patch. Quickly she knelt down on the footpath, to see. Yes! Tiny green
leaves, a whole row of them, were pushing their way through the crust! Margery knew what she had put there: it was the radish-row; these must
be radish leaves. She examined them very closely, so that she might
know a radish next time. The little leaves, no bigger than half your
little-finger nail, grew in twos,--two on each tiny stem; they were
almost round. Margery flew back to her mother, to say that the first seeds were up. And her mother, nearly as excited as Margery, came to look at the little
crack. Each day, after that, the row of radishes grew, till, in a week, it
stood as high as your finger, green and sturdy. But about the third day,
while Margery was stooping over the radishes, she saw something very,
very small and green, peeping above ground, where the lettuce was
planted. Could it be weeds? No, for on looking very closely she saw that
the wee leaves faintly marked a regular row. They did not make a crack,
like the radishes; they seemed too small and too far apart to push the
earth up like that. Margery leaned down and looked with all her eyes at
the baby plants. The tiny leaves grew two on a stem, and were almost
round. The more she looked at them the more it seemed to Margery that
they looked exactly as the radish looked when it first came up. "Do you
suppose," Margery said to herself, "that lettuce and radish look alike
while they are growing? They don't look alike when they are on the
table!" Day by day the lettuce grew, and soon the little round leaves were
easier to examine; they certainly were very much like radish leaves. Then, one morning, while she was searching for signs of other seeds,
Margery discovered the beets. In irregular patches on the row, hints of
green were coming. The next day and the next they grew, until the beet
leaves were big enough to see. Margery looked. Then she looked again. Then she wrinkled her forehead. "Can we have made a mistake?" she thought. "Do you suppose we can have
planted _all_ radishes?" For those little beet leaves were almost round, and they grew two on a
stem, precisely like the lettuce and the radish; except for the size,
all three rows looked alike. It was too much for Margery. She ran to the house and found her father. Her little face was so anxious that he thought something unpleasant had
happened. "Papa," she said, all out of breath, "do you think we could
have made a mistake about my garden? Do you think we could have put
radishes in all the rows?" Father laughed. "What makes you think such a thing?" he asked. "Papa," said Margery, "the little leaves all look exactly alike! every
plant has just two tiny leaves on it, and shaped the same; they are
roundish, and grow out of the stem at the same place." Papa's eyes began to twinkle. "Many of the dicotyledonous plants look
alike at the beginning," he said, with a little drawl on the big word. That was to tease Margery, because she always wanted to know the big
words she heard. "What's 'dicotyledonous'?" said Margery, carefully. "Wait till I come home to-night, dear," said her father, "and I'll tell
you." That evening Margery was waiting eagerly for him. When her father
finished his supper they went together to the garden, and father
examined the seedlings carefully. Then he pulled up a little radish
plant and a tiny beet. "These little leaves," he said, "are not the real leaves of the plant;
they are only little pockets to hold food for the plant to live on till
it gets strong enough to push up into the air. As soon as the real
leaves come out and begin to draw food from the air, these little
substitutes wither up and fall off. These two lie folded up in the
little seed from the beginning, and are full of plant food. They don't
have to be very special in shape, you see, because they don't stay on
the plant after it is grown up." "Then every plant looks like this at first?" said Margery. "No, dear, not every one; plants are divided into two kinds: those which
have two food leaves, like these plants, and those which have only one;
these are called dicotyledonous, and the ones which have but one food
leaf are monocotyledonous. Many of the dicotyledons look alike." "I think that is interesting," said Margery. "I always, supposed the plants were different from the minute they began
to grow." "Indeed, no," said father. "Even some of the trees look like this when
they first come through; you would not think a birch tree could look
like a vegetable or a flower, would you? But it does, at first; it looks
so much like these things that in the great nurseries, where trees are
raised for forests and parks, the workmen have to be very carefully
trained, or else they would pull up the trees when they are weeding. They have to be taught the difference between a birch tree and a weed." "How funny!" said Margery, dimpling. "Yes, it sounds funny," said father; "but, you see, the birch tree is
dicotyledonous, and so are many weeds, and the dicotyledons look so much
alike at first." "I am glad to know that, father," said Margery, soberly. "I believe I
shall learn a good deal from living in the country; don't you think so?" Margery's father took her in his arms. "I hope so, dear," he said; "the
country is a good place for little girls." And that was all that happened, that day. THE TALKATIVE TORTOISE


Once upon a time, a Tortoise lived in a pond with two Ducks, who were
her very good friends. She enjoyed the company of the Ducks, because she
could talk with them to her heart's content; the Tortoise liked to talk. She always had something to say, and she liked to hear herself say it. After many years of this pleasant living, the pond became very low, in a
dry season; and finally it dried up. The two Ducks saw that they could
no longer live there, so they decided to fly to another region, where
there was more water. They went to the Tortoise to bid her good-bye. "Oh, don't leave me behind!" begged the Tortoise. "Take me with you; I
must die if I am left here." "But you cannot fly!" said the Ducks. "How can we take you with us?" "Take me with you! take me with you!" said the Tortoise. The Ducks felt so sorry for her that at last they thought of a way to
take her. "We have thought of a way which will be possible," they said,
"if only you can manage to keep still long enough. We will each take
hold of one end of a stout stick, and do you take the middle in your
mouth; then we will fly up in the air with you and carry you with us. But remember not to talk! If you open your mouth, you are lost." The Tortoise said she would not say a word; she would not so much as
move her mouth; and she was very grateful. So the Ducks brought a strong
little stick and took hold of the ends, while the Tortoise bit firmly on
the middle. Then the two Ducks rose slowly in the air and flew away with
their burden. When they were above the treetops, the Tortoise wanted to say, "How high
we are!" But she remembered, and kept still. When they passed the church
steeple she wanted to say, "What is that which shines?" But she
remembered, and held her peace. Then they came over the village square,
and the people looked up and saw them. "Look at the Ducks carrying a
Tortoise!" they shouted; and every one ran to look. The Tortoise wanted
to say, "What business is it of yours?" But she didn't. Then she heard
the people shout, "Isn't it strange! Look at it! Look!" The Tortoise forgot everything except that she wanted to say, "Hush, you
foolish people!" She opened her mouth,--and fell to the ground. And that
was the end of the Tortoise. It is a very good thing to be able to hold one's tongue! ROBERT OF SICILY


An old legend says that there was once a king named Robert of Sicily,
who was brother to the Great Pope of Rome and to the Emperor of
Allemaine. He was a very selfish king, and very proud; he cared more for
his pleasures than for the needs of his people, and his heart was so
filled with his own greatness that he had no thought for God. One day, this proud king was sitting in his place at church, at vesper
service; his courtiers were about him, in their bright garments, and he
himself was dressed in his royal robes. The choir was chanting the Latin
service, and as the beautiful voices swelled louder, the king noticed
one particular verse which seemed to be repeated again and again. He
turned to a learned clerk at his side and asked what those words meant,
for he knew no Latin. "They mean, 'He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and hath
exalted them of low degree,'" answered the clerk. "It is well the words are in Latin, then," said the king angrily, "for
they are a lie. There is no power on earth or in heaven which can put me
down from my seat!" and he sneered at the beautiful singing, as he
leaned back in his place. Presently the king fell asleep, while the service went on. He slept
deeply and long. When he awoke the church was dark and still, and he was
all alone. He, the king, had been left alone in the church, to awake in
the dark! He was furious with rage and surprise, and, stumbling through
the dim aisles, he reached the great doors and beat at them, madly,
shouting for his servants. The old sexton heard some one shouting and pounding in the church, and
thought it was some drunken vagabond who had stolen in during the
service. He came to the door with his keys and called out, "Who is
there?" "Open! open! It is I, the king!" came a hoarse, angry voice from within. "It is a crazy man," thought the sexton; and he was frightened. He
opened the doors carefully and stood back, peering into the darkness. Out past him rushed the figure of a man in tattered, scanty clothes,
with unkempt hair and white, wild face. The sexton did not know that he
had ever seen him before, but he looked long after him, wondering at his
wildness and his haste. In his fluttering rags, without hat or cloak, not knowing what strange
thing had happened to him, King Robert rushed to his palace gates,
pushed aside the startled servants, and hurried, blind with rage, up the
wide stair and through the great corridors, toward the room where he
could hear the sound of his courtiers' voices. Men and women servants
tried to stop the ragged man, who had somehow got into the palace, but
Robert did not even see them as he fled along. Straight to the open
doors of the big banquet hall he made his way, and into the midst of the
grand feast there. The great hall was filled with lights and flowers; the tables were set
with everything that is delicate and rich to eat; the courtiers, in
their gay clothes, were laughing and talking; and at the head of the
feast, on the king's own throne, sat a king. His face, his figure, his
voice were exactly like Robert of Sicily; no human being could have told
the difference; no one dreamed that he was not the king. He was dressed
in the king's royal robes, he wore the royal crown, and on his hand was
the king's own ring. Robert of Sicily, half naked, ragged, without a
sign of his kingship on him, stood before the throne and stared with
fury at this figure of himself. The king on the throne looked at him. "Who art thou, and what dost thou
here?" he asked. And though his voice was just like Robert's own, it had
something in it sweet and deep, like the sound of bells. "I am the king!" cried Robert of Sicily. "I am the king, and you are an
impostor!" The courtiers started from their seats, and drew their swords. They
would have killed the crazy man who insulted their king; but he raised
his hand and stopped them, and with his eyes looking into Robert's eyes
he said, "Not the king; you shall be the king's jester! You shall wear
the cap and bells, and make laughter for my court. You shall be the
servant of the servants, and your companion shall, be the jester's ape." With shouts of laughter, the courtiers drove Robert of Sicily from the
banquet hall; the waiting-men, with laughter, too, pushed him into the
soldiers' hall; and there the pages brought the jester's wretched ape,
and put a fool's cap and bells on Robert's head. It was like a terrible
dream; he could not believe it true, he could not understand what had
happened to him. And when he woke next morning, he believed it was a
dream, and that he was king again. But as he turned his head, he felt
the coarse straw under his cheek instead of the soft pillow, and he saw
that he was in the stable, with the shivering ape by his side. Robert of
Sicily was a jester, and no one knew him for the king. Three long years passed. Sicily was happy and all things went well under
the king, who was not Robert. Robert was still the jester, and his heart
grew harder and more bitter with every year. Many times, during the
three years, the king, who had his face and voice, had called him to
himself, when none else could hear, and had asked him the one question,
"Who art thou?" And each time that he asked it his eyes looked into
Robert's eyes, to find his heart. But each time Robert threw back his
head and answered, proudly, "I am the king!" And the other king's eyes
grew sad and stern. At the end of three years, the Pope called the Emperor of Allemaine and
the King of Sicily, his brothers, to a great meeting in his city of
Rome. The King of Sicily went, with all his soldiers and courtiers and
servants,--a great procession of horsemen and footmen. Never had there
been seen a finer sight than the grand train, men in bright armour,
riders in wonderful cloaks of velvet and silk, servants, carrying
marvellous presents to the Pope. And at the very end rode Robert, the
jester. His horse was poor and old, many-coloured, and the ape rode with
him. Every one in the villages through which they passed ran after the
jester, and pointed and laughed. The Pope received his brothers and their trains in the square before
Saint Peter's. With music and flags and flowers he made the King of
Sicily welcome, and greeted him as his brother. In the midst of it, the
jester broke through the crowd and threw himself before the Pope. "Look
at me!" he cried; "I am your brother, Robert of Sicily! This man is an
impostor, who has stolen my throne. I am Robert, the king!" The Pope looked at the poor jester with pity, but the Emperor of
Allemaine turned to the King of Sicily, and said, "Is it not rather
dangerous, brother, to keep a madman as jester?" And again Robert was
pushed back among the serving-men.