9:33 And he came to Capernaum: and being in the house he asked them,
What was it that ye disputed among yourselves by the way? 9:34 But
they held their peace: for by the way they had disputed among
themselves, who should be the greatest. 9:35 And he sat down, and called the twelve, and saith unto them, If
any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and servant
of all. 9:36 And he took a child, and set him in the midst of them: and when
he had taken him in his arms, he said unto them, 9:37 Whosoever shall
receive one of such children in my name, receiveth me: and whosoever
shall receive me, receiveth not me, but him that sent me. 9:38 And John answered him, saying, Master, we saw one casting out
devils in thy name, and he followeth not us: and we forbad him,
because he followeth not us. 9:39 But Jesus said, Forbid him not: for there is no man which shall
do a miracle in my name, that can lightly speak evil of me. 9:40 For he that is not against us is on our part. 9:41 For whosoever shall give you a cup of water to drink in my name,
because ye belong to Christ, verily I say unto you, he shall not lose
his reward. 9:42 And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe
in me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his
neck, and he were cast into the sea. 9:43 And if thy hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into
the fire that never shall be quenched: 9:44 Where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched. 9:45 And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to
enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell, into
the fire that never shall be quenched: 9:46 Where their worm dieth
not, and the fire is not quenched. 9:47 And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee
to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to
be cast into hell fire: 9:48 Where their worm dieth not, and the fire
is not quenched. 9:49 For every one shall be salted with fire, and every sacrifice
shall be salted with salt. 9:50 Salt is good: but if the salt have lost his saltness, wherewith
will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace one with
another. 10:1 And he arose from thence, and cometh into the coasts of Judaea by
the farther side of Jordan: and the people resort unto him again; and,
as he was wont, he taught them again. 10:2 And the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, Is it lawful for a
man to put away his wife? tempting him. 10:3 And he answered and said unto them, What did Moses command you? 10:4 And they said, Moses suffered to write a bill of divorcement, and
to put her away. 10:5 And Jesus answered and said unto them, For the hardness of your
heart he wrote you this precept. 10:6 But from the beginning of the creation God made them male and
female. 10:7 For this cause shall a man leave his father and mother, and
cleave to his wife; 10:8 And they twain shall be one flesh: so then
they are no more twain, but one flesh. 10:9 What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put asunder. 10:10 And in the house his disciples asked him again of the same
matter. 10:11 And he saith unto them, Whosoever shall put away his wife, and
marry another, committeth adultery against her. 10:12 And if a woman shall put away her husband, and be married to
another, she committeth adultery. 10:13 And they brought young children to him, that he should touch
them: and his disciples rebuked those that brought them. 10:14 But when Jesus saw it, he was much displeased, and said unto
them, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and forbid them not:
for of such is the kingdom of God. 10:15 Verily I say unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom
of God as a little child, he shall not enter therein. 10:16 And he took them up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and
blessed them. 10:17 And when he was gone forth into the way, there came one running,
and kneeled to him, and asked him, Good Master, what shall I do that I
may inherit eternal life? 10:18 And Jesus said unto him, Why callest
thou me good? there is none good but one, that is, God. 10:19 Thou knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not
kill, Do not steal, Do not bear false witness, Defraud not, Honour thy
father and mother. 10:20 And he answered and said unto him, Master,
all these have I observed from my youth. 10:21 Then Jesus beholding him loved him, and said unto him, One thing
thou lackest: go thy way, sell whatsoever thou hast, and give to the
poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, take up the
cross, and follow me. 10:22 And he was sad at that saying, and went away grieved: for he had
great possessions. 10:23 And Jesus looked round about, and saith unto his disciples, How
hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! 10:24 And the disciples were astonished at his words. But Jesus
answereth again, and saith unto them, Children, how hard is it for
them that trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God! 10:25 It
is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 10:26 And they were astonished out of measure, saying among
themselves, Who then can be saved? 10:27 And Jesus looking upon them
saith, With men it is impossible, but not with God: for with God all
things are possible. 10:28 Then Peter began to say unto him, Lo, we have left all, and have
followed thee. 10:29 And Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, There is no
man that hath left house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my sake, and the gospel's,
10:30 But he shall receive an hundredfold now in this time, houses,
and brethren, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands, with
persecutions; and in the world to come eternal life. 10:31 But many that are first shall be last; and the last first. 10:32 And they were in the way going up to Jerusalem; and Jesus went
before them: and they were amazed; and as they followed, they were
afraid. And he took again the twelve, and began to tell them what things
should happen unto him, 10:33 Saying, Behold, we go up to Jerusalem;
and the Son of man shall be delivered unto the chief priests, and unto
the scribes; and they shall condemn him to death, and shall deliver
him to the Gentiles: 10:34 And they shall mock him, and shall scourge
him, and shall spit upon him, and shall kill him: and the third day he
shall rise again. 10:35 And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come unto him, saying,
Master, we would that thou shouldest do for us whatsoever we shall
desire. 10:36 And he said unto them, What would ye that I should do for you? 10:37 They said unto him, Grant unto us that we may sit, one on thy
right hand, and the other on thy left hand, in thy glory. 10:38 But Jesus said unto them, Ye know not what ye ask: can ye drink
of the cup that I drink of? and be baptized with the baptism that I am
baptized with? 10:39 And they said unto him, We can. And Jesus said
unto them, Ye shall indeed drink of the cup that I drink of; and with
the baptism that I am baptized withal shall ye be baptized: 10:40 But
to sit on my right hand and on my left hand is not mine to give; but
it shall be given to them for whom it is prepared. 10:41 And when the ten heard it, they began to be much displeased with
James and John. 10:42 But Jesus called them to him, and saith unto them, Ye know that
they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles exercise lordship
over them; and their great ones exercise authority upon them. 10:43 But so shall it not be among you: but whosoever will be great
among you, shall be your minister: 10:44 And whosoever of you will be
the chiefest, shall be servant of all. 10:45 For even the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to
minister, and to give his life a ransom for many. 10:46 And they came to Jericho: and as he went out of Jericho with his
disciples and a great number of people, blind Bartimaeus, the son of
Timaeus, sat by the highway side begging. 10:47 And when he heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth, he began to cry
out, and say, Jesus, thou son of David, have mercy on me. 10:48 And many charged him that he should hold his peace: but he cried
the more a great deal, Thou son of David, have mercy on me. 10:49 And Jesus stood still, and commanded him to be called. And they
call the blind man, saying unto him, Be of good comfort, rise; he
calleth thee. 10:50 And he, casting away his garment, rose, and came to Jesus. 10:51 And Jesus answered and said unto him, What wilt thou that I
should do unto thee? The blind man said unto him, Lord, that I might
receive my sight. 10:52 And Jesus said unto him, Go thy way; thy faith hath made thee
whole. And immediately he received his sight, and followed Jesus in the way. 11:1 And when they came nigh to Jerusalem, unto Bethphage and Bethany,
at the mount of Olives, he sendeth forth two of his disciples, 11:2
And saith unto them, Go your way into the village over against you:
and as soon as ye be entered into it, ye shall find a colt tied,
whereon never man sat; loose him, and bring him. 11:3 And if any man say unto you, Why do ye this? say ye that the Lord
hath need of him; and straightway he will send him hither. 11:4 And they went their way, and found the colt tied by the door
without in a place where two ways met; and they loose him. 11:5 And certain of them that stood there said unto them, What do ye,
loosing the colt? 11:6 And they said unto them even as Jesus had
commanded: and they let them go. 11:7 And they brought the colt to Jesus, and cast their garments on
him; and he sat upon him. 11:8 And many spread their garments in the way: and others cut down
branches off the trees, and strawed them in the way. 11:9 And they that went before, and they that followed, cried, saying,
Hosanna; Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord: 11:10
Blessed be the kingdom of our father David, that cometh in the name of
the Lord: Hosanna in the highest. 11:11 And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple: and when
he had looked round about upon all things, and now the eventide was
come, he went out unto Bethany with the twelve. 11:12 And on the morrow, when they were come from Bethany, he was
hungry: 11:13 And seeing a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came,
if haply he might find any thing thereon: and when he came to it, he
found nothing but leaves; for the time of figs was not yet. 11:14 And Jesus answered and said unto it, No man eat fruit of thee
hereafter for ever. And his disciples heard it. 11:15 And they come to Jerusalem: and Jesus went into the temple, and
began to cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and
overthrew the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of them that
sold doves; 11:16 And would not suffer that any man should carry any
vessel through the temple. 11:17 And he taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house
shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made
it a den of thieves. 11:18 And the scribes and chief priests heard it, and sought how they
might destroy him: for they feared him, because all the people was
astonished at his doctrine. 11:19 And when even was come, he went out of the city. 11:20 And in the morning, as they passed by, they saw the fig tree
dried up from the roots. 11:21 And Peter calling to remembrance saith unto him, Master, behold,
the fig tree which thou cursedst is withered away. 11:22 And Jesus answering saith unto them, Have faith in God. 11:23 For verily I say unto you, That whosoever shall say unto this
mountain, Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and shall
not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those things which he
saith shall come to pass; he shall have whatsoever he saith. 11:24 Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire, when ye
pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them. 11:25 And when ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against
any: that your Father also which is in heaven may forgive you your
trespasses. 11:26 But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in
heaven forgive your trespasses. 11:27 And they come again to Jerusalem: and as he was walking in the
temple, there come to him the chief priests, and the scribes, and the
elders, 11:28 And say unto him, By what authority doest thou these
things? and who gave thee this authority to do these things? 11:29
And Jesus answered and said unto them, I will also ask of you one
question, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do
these things. 11:30 The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or of men? answer me. 11:31 And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, From
heaven; he will say, Why then did ye not believe him? 11:32 But if we
shall say, Of men; they feared the people: for all men counted John,
that he was a prophet indeed. 11:33 And they answered and said unto Jesus, We cannot tell. And Jesus
answering saith unto them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I
do these things. 12:1 And he began to speak unto them by parables. A certain man
planted a vineyard, and set an hedge about it, and digged a place for
the winefat, and built a tower, and let it out to husbandmen, and went
into a far country. 12:2 And at the season he sent to the husbandmen a servant, that he
might receive from the husbandmen of the fruit of the vineyard. 12:3 And they caught him, and beat him, and sent him away empty. 12:4 And again he sent unto them another servant; and at him they cast
stones, and wounded him in the head, and sent him away shamefully
handled. 12:5 And again he sent another; and him they killed, and many others;
beating some, and killing some. 12:6 Having yet therefore one son, his wellbeloved, he sent him also
last unto them, saying, They will reverence my son. 12:7 But those husbandmen said among themselves, This is the heir;
come, let us kill him, and the inheritance shall be our's. 12:8 And they took him, and killed him, and cast him out of the
vineyard. 12:9 What shall therefore the lord of the vineyard do? he will come
and destroy the husbandmen, and will give the vineyard unto others. 12:10 And have ye not read this scripture; The stone which the
builders rejected is become the head of the corner: 12:11 This was the
Lord's doing, and it is marvellous in our eyes? 12:12 And they sought
to lay hold on him, but feared the people: for they knew that he had
spoken the parable against them: and they left him, and went their
way. 12:13 And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the
Herodians, to catch him in his words. 12:14 And when they were come, they say unto him, Master, we know that
thou art true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the
person of men, but teachest the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to
give tribute to Caesar, or not? 12:15 Shall we give, or shall we not
give? But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye
me? bring me a penny, that I may see it. 12:16 And they brought it. And he saith unto them, Whose is this image
and superscription? And they said unto him, Caesar's. 12:17 And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's. And they
marvelled at him. 12:18 Then come unto him the Sadducees, which say there is no
resurrection; and they asked him, saying, 12:19 Master, Moses wrote
unto us, If a man's brother die, and leave his wife behind him, and
leave no children, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up
seed unto his brother. 12:20 Now there were seven brethren: and the first took a wife, and
dying left no seed. 12:21 And the second took her, and died, neither left he any seed: and
the third likewise. 12:22 And the seven had her, and left no seed: last of all the woman
died also. 12:23 In the resurrection therefore, when they shall rise, whose wife
shall she be of them? for the seven had her to wife. 12:24 And Jesus answering said unto them, Do ye not therefore err,
because ye know not the scriptures, neither the power of God? 12:25
For when they shall rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are
given in marriage; but are as the angels which are in heaven. 12:26 And as touching the dead, that they rise: have ye not read in
the book of Moses, how in the bush God spake unto him, saying, I am
the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? 12:27
He is not the God of the dead, but the God of the living: ye therefore
do greatly err. 12:28 And one of the scribes came, and having heard them reasoning
together, and perceiving that he had answered them well, asked him,
Which is the first commandment of all? 12:29 And Jesus answered him,
The first of all the commandments is, Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God
is one Lord: 12:30 And thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength: this is the first commandment. 12:31 And the second is like, namely this, Thou shalt love thy
neighbour as thyself. There is none other commandment greater than
these. 12:32 And the scribe said unto him, Well, Master, thou hast said the
truth: for there is one God; and there is none other but he: 12:33 And
to love him with all the heart, and with all the understanding, and
with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love his
neighbour as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and
sacrifices. 12:34 And when Jesus saw that he answered discreetly, he said unto
him, Thou art not far from the kingdom of God. And no man after that
durst ask him any question. 12:35 And Jesus answered and said, while he taught in the temple, How
say the scribes that Christ is the son of David? 12:36 For David
himself said by the Holy Ghost, The LORD said to my Lord, Sit thou on
my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool. 12:37 David therefore himself calleth him Lord; and whence is he then
his son? And the common people heard him gladly. 12:38 And he said unto them in his doctrine, Beware of the scribes,
which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the
marketplaces, 12:39 And the chief seats in the synagogues, and the
uppermost rooms at feasts: 12:40 Which devour widows' houses, and for
a pretence make long prayers: these shall receive greater damnation. 12:41 And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the
people cast money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in
much. 12:42 And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites,
which make a farthing. 12:43 And he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto them,
Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than
all they which have cast into the treasury: 12:44 For all they did
cast in of their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that
she had, even all her living. 13:1 And as he went out of the temple, one of his disciples saith unto
him, Master, see what manner of stones and what buildings are here! 13:2 And Jesus answering said unto him, Seest thou these great
buildings? there shall not be left one stone upon another, that shall
not be thrown down. 13:3 And as he sat upon the mount of Olives over against the temple,
Peter and James and John and Andrew asked him privately, 13:4 Tell us,
when shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when all these
things shall be fulfilled? 13:5 And Jesus answering them began to
say, Take heed lest any man deceive you: 13:6 For many shall come in
my name, saying, I am Christ; and shall deceive many. 13:7 And when ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars, be ye not
troubled: for such things must needs be; but the end shall not be yet. 13:8 For nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom: and there shall be earthquakes in divers places, and there
shall be famines and troubles: these are the beginnings of sorrows. 13:9 But take heed to yourselves: for they shall deliver you up to
councils; and in the synagogues ye shall be beaten: and ye shall be
brought before rulers and kings for my sake, for a testimony against
them. 13:10 And the gospel must first be published among all nations. 13:11 But when they shall lead you, and deliver you up, take no
thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye premeditate: but
whatsoever shall be given you in that hour, that speak ye: for it is
not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost. 13:12 Now the brother shall betray the brother to death, and the
father the son; and children shall rise up against their parents, and
shall cause them to be put to death. 13:13 And ye shall be hated of all men for my name's sake: but he that
shall endure unto the end, the same shall be saved. 13:14 But when ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of
by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not, (let him that
readeth understand,) then let them that be in Judaea flee to the
mountains: 13:15 And let him that is on the housetop not go down into
the house, neither enter therein, to take any thing out of his house:
13:16 And let him that is in the field not turn back again for to take
up his garment. 13:17 But woe to them that are with child, and to them that give suck
in those days! 13:18 And pray ye that your flight be not in the
winter. 13:19 For in those days shall be affliction, such as was not from the
beginning of the creation which God created unto this time, neither
shall be. 13:20 And except that the Lord had shortened those days, no flesh
should be saved: but for the elect's sake, whom he hath chosen, he
hath shortened the days. 13:21 And then if any man shall say to you, Lo, here is Christ; or,
lo, he is there; believe him not: 13:22 For false Christs and false
prophets shall rise, and shall shew signs and wonders, to seduce, if
it were possible, even the elect. 13:23 But take ye heed: behold, I have foretold you all things. 13:24 But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun shall be
darkened, and the moon shall not give her light, 13:25 And the stars
of heaven shall fall, and the powers that are in heaven shall be
shaken. 13:26 And then shall they see the Son of man coming in the clouds with
great power and glory. 13:27 And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together his
elect from the four winds, from the uttermost part of the earth to the
uttermost part of heaven. 13:28 Now learn a parable of the fig tree; When her branch is yet
tender, and putteth forth leaves, ye know that summer is near: 13:29
So ye in like manner, when ye shall see these things come to pass,
know that it is nigh, even at the doors. 13:30 Verily I say unto you, that this generation shall not pass, till
all these things be done. 13:31 Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall not pass
away. 13:32 But of that day and that hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. 13:33 Take ye heed, watch and pray: for ye know not when the time is. 13:34 For the Son of Man is as a man taking a far journey, who left
his house, and gave authority to his servants, and to every man his
work, and commanded the porter to watch. 13:35 Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when the master of the house
cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at the cockcrowing, or in the
morning: 13:36 Lest coming suddenly he find you sleeping. 13:37 And what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch. 14:1 After two days was the feast of the passover, and of unleavened
bread: and the chief priests and the scribes sought how they might
take him by craft, and put him to death. 14:2 But they said, Not on the feast day, lest there be an uproar of
the people. 14:3 And being in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat
at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of ointment of
spikenard very precious; and she brake the box, and poured it on his
head. 14:4 And there were some that had indignation within themselves, and
said, Why was this waste of the ointment made? 14:5 For it might have
been sold for more than three hundred pence, and have been given to
the poor. And they murmured against her. 14:6 And Jesus said, Let her alone; why trouble ye her? she hath
wrought a good work on me. 14:7 For ye have the poor with you always, and whensoever ye will ye
may do them good: but me ye have not always. 14:8 She hath done what she could: she is come aforehand to anoint my
body to the burying. 14:9 Verily I say unto you, Wheresoever this gospel shall be preached
throughout the whole world, this also that she hath done shall be
spoken of for a memorial of her. 14:10 And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went unto the chief
priests, to betray him unto them. 14:11 And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him
money. And he sought how he might conveniently betray him. 14:12 And the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the
passover, his disciples said unto him, Where wilt thou that we go and
prepare that thou mayest eat the passover? 14:13 And he sendeth forth
two of his disciples, and saith unto them, Go ye into the city, and
there shall meet you a man bearing a pitcher of water: follow him. 14:14 And wheresoever he shall go in, say ye to the goodman of the
house, The Master saith, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat
the passover with my disciples? 14:15 And he will shew you a large
upper room furnished and prepared: there make ready for us. 14:16 And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found
as he had said unto them: and they made ready the passover. 14:17 And in the evening he cometh with the twelve. 14:18 And as they sat and did eat, Jesus said, Verily I say unto you,
One of you which eateth with me shall betray me. 14:19 And they began to be sorrowful, and to say unto him one by one,
Is it I? and another said, Is it I? 14:20 And he answered and said
unto them, It is one of the twelve, that dippeth with me in the dish. 14:21 The Son of man indeed goeth, as it is written of him: but woe to
that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! good were it for that man
if he had never been born. 14:22 And as they did eat, Jesus took bread, and blessed, and brake
it, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat: this is my body. 14:23 And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he gave it to
them: and they all drank of it. 14:24 And he said unto them, This is my blood of the new testament,
which is shed for many. 14:25 Verily I say unto you, I will drink no more of the fruit of the
vine, until that day that I drink it new in the kingdom of God. 14:26 And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
Olives. 14:27 And Jesus saith unto them, All ye shall be offended because of
me this night: for it is written, I will smite the shepherd, and the
sheep shall be scattered. 14:28 But after that I am risen, I will go before you into Galilee. 14:29 But Peter said unto him, Although all shall be offended, yet
will not I. 14:30 And Jesus saith unto him, Verily I say unto thee, That this day,
even in this night, before the cock crow twice, thou shalt deny me
thrice. 14:31 But he spake the more vehemently, If I should die with thee, I
will not deny thee in any wise. Likewise also said they all. 14:32 And they came to a place which was named Gethsemane: and he
saith to his disciples, Sit ye here, while I shall pray. 14:33 And he taketh with him Peter and James and John, and began to be
sore amazed, and to be very heavy; 14:34 And saith unto them, My soul
is exceeding sorrowful unto death: tarry ye here, and watch. 14:35 And he went forward a little, and fell on the ground, and prayed
that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him. 14:36 And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible unto thee;
take away this cup from me: nevertheless not what I will, but what
thou wilt. 14:37 And he cometh, and findeth them sleeping, and saith unto Peter,
Simon, sleepest thou? couldest not thou watch one hour? 14:38 Watch
ye and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. The spirit truly is ready,
but the flesh is weak. 14:39 And again he went away, and prayed, and spake the same words. 14:40 And when he returned, he found them asleep again, (for their
eyes were heavy,) neither wist they what to answer him. 14:41 And he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, Sleep on now,
and take your rest: it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the Son of
man is betrayed into the hands of sinners. 14:42 Rise up, let us go; lo, he that betrayeth me is at hand. 14:43 And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the
twelve, and with him a great multitude with swords and staves, from
the chief priests and the scribes and the elders. 14:44 And he that betrayed him had given them a token, saying,
Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and lead him away
safely. 14:45 And as soon as he was come, he goeth straightway to him, and
saith, Master, master; and kissed him. 14:46 And they laid their hands on him, and took him. 14:47 And one of them that stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant
of the high priest, and cut off his ear. 14:48 And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out, as
against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me? 14:49 I was
daily with you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not: but the
scriptures must be fulfilled. 14:50 And they all forsook him, and fled. 14:51 And there followed him a certain young man, having a linen cloth
cast about his naked body; and the young men laid hold on him: 14:52
And he left the linen cloth, and fled from them naked. 14:53 And they led Jesus away to the high priest: and with him were
assembled all the chief priests and the elders and the scribes. 14:54 And Peter followed him afar off, even into the palace of the
high priest: and he sat with the servants, and warmed himself at the
fire. 14:55 And the chief priests and all the council sought for witness
against Jesus to put him to death; and found none. 14:56 For many bare false witness against him, but their witness
agreed not together. 14:57 And there arose certain, and bare false witness against him,
saying, 14:58 We heard him say, I will destroy this temple that is
made with hands, and within three days I will build another made
without hands. 14:59 But neither so did their witness agree together. 14:60 And the high priest stood up in the midst, and asked Jesus,
saying, Answerest thou nothing? what is it which these witness against
thee? 14:61 But he held his peace, and answered nothing. Again the
high priest asked him, and said unto him, Art thou the Christ, the Son
of the Blessed? 14:62 And Jesus said, I am: and ye shall see the Son
of man sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven. 14:63 Then the high priest rent his clothes, and saith, What need we
any further witnesses? 14:64 Ye have heard the blasphemy: what think
ye? And they all condemned him to be guilty of death. 14:65 And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to
buffet him, and to say unto him, Prophesy: and the servants did strike
him with the palms of their hands. 14:66 And as Peter was beneath in the palace, there cometh one of the
maids of the high priest: 14:67 And when she saw Peter warming
himself, she looked upon him, and said, And thou also wast with Jesus
of Nazareth. 14:68 But he denied, saying, I know not, neither understand I what
thou sayest. And he went out into the porch; and the cock crew. 14:69 And a maid saw him again, and began to say to them that stood
by, This is one of them. 14:70 And he denied it again. And a little after, they that stood by
said again to Peter, Surely thou art one of them: for thou art a
Galilaean, and thy speech agreeth thereto. 14:71 But he began to curse and to swear, saying, I know not this man
of whom ye speak. 14:72 And the second time the cock crew. And Peter called to mind the
word that Jesus said unto him, Before the cock crow twice, thou shalt
deny me thrice. And when he thought thereon, he wept. 15:1 And straightway in the morning the chief priests held a
consultation with the elders and scribes and the whole council, and
bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate. 15:2 And Pilate asked him, Art thou the King of the Jews? And he
answering said unto them, Thou sayest it. 15:3 And the chief priests accused him of many things: but he answered
nothing. 15:4 And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou nothing? behold how many things they witness against thee. 15:5 But Jesus yet answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled. 15:6 Now at that feast he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever
they desired. 15:7 And there was one named Barabbas, which lay bound with them that
had made insurrection with him, who had committed murder in the
insurrection. 15:8 And the multitude crying aloud began to desire him to do as he
had ever done unto them. 15:9 But Pilate answered them, saying, Will ye that I release unto you
the King of the Jews? 15:10 For he knew that the chief priests had
delivered him for envy. 15:11 But the chief priests moved the people, that he should rather
release Barabbas unto them. 15:12 And Pilate answered and said again unto them, What will ye then
that I shall do unto him whom ye call the King of the Jews? 15:13 And
they cried out again, Crucify him. 15:14 Then Pilate said unto them, Why, what evil hath he done? And
they cried out the more exceedingly, Crucify him. 15:15 And so Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas
unto them, and delivered Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be
crucified. 15:16 And the soldiers led him away into the hall, called Praetorium;
and they call together the whole band. 15:17 And they clothed him with purple, and platted a crown of thorns,
and put it about his head, 15:18 And began to salute him, Hail, King
of the Jews! 15:19 And they smote him on the head with a reed, and
did spit upon him, and bowing their knees worshipped him. 15:20 And when they had mocked him, they took off the purple from him,
and put his own clothes on him, and led him out to crucify him. 15:21 And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian, who passed by, coming out
of the country, the father of Alexander and Rufus, to bear his cross. 15:22 And they bring him unto the place Golgotha, which is, being
interpreted, The place of a skull. 15:23 And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh: but he
received it not. 15:24 And when they had crucified him, they parted his garments,
casting lots upon them, what every man should take. 15:25 And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. 15:26 And the superscription of his accusation was written over, THE
KING OF THE JEWS. 15:27 And with him they crucify two thieves; the one on his right
hand, and the other on his left. 15:28 And the scripture was fulfilled, which saith, And he was
numbered with the transgressors. 15:29 And they that passed by railed on him, wagging their heads, and
saying, Ah, thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three
days, 15:30 Save thyself, and come down from the cross. 15:31 Likewise also the chief priests mocking said among themselves
with the scribes, He saved others; himself he cannot save. 15:32 Let Christ the King of Israel descend now from the cross, that
we may see and believe. And they that were crucified with him reviled
him. 15:33 And when the sixth hour was come, there was darkness over the
whole land until the ninth hour. 15:34 And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying,
Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my
God, why hast thou forsaken me? 15:35 And some of them that stood by,
when they heard it, said, Behold, he calleth Elias. 15:36 And one ran and filled a spunge full of vinegar, and put it on a
reed, and gave him to drink, saying, Let alone; let us see whether
Elias will come to take him down. 15:37 And Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. 15:38 And the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom. 15:39 And when the centurion, which stood over against him, saw that
he so cried out, and gave up the ghost, he said, Truly this man was
the Son of God. 15:40 There were also women looking on afar off: among whom was Mary
Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the less and of Joses, and
Salome; 15:41 (Who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him, and
ministered unto him;) and many other women which came up with him unto
Jerusalem. 15:42 And now when the even was come, because it was the preparation,
that is, the day before the sabbath, 15:43 Joseph of Arimathaea, an
honourable counsellor, which also waited for the kingdom of God, came,
and went in boldly unto Pilate, and craved the body of Jesus. 15:44 And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead: and calling unto
him the centurion, he asked him whether he had been any while dead. 15:45 And when he knew it of the centurion, he gave the body to
Joseph. 15:46 And he bought fine linen, and took him down, and wrapped him in
the linen, and laid him in a sepulchre which was hewn out of a rock,
and rolled a stone unto the door of the sepulchre. 15:47 And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses beheld where he
was laid. 16:1 And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the
mother of James, and Salome, had bought sweet spices, that they might
come and anoint him. 16:2 And very early in the morning the first day of the week, they
came unto the sepulchre at the rising of the sun. 16:3 And they said among themselves, Who shall roll us away the stone
from the door of the sepulchre? 16:4 And when they looked, they saw
that the stone was rolled away: for it was very great. 16:5 And entering into the sepulchre, they saw a young man sitting on
the right side, clothed in a long white garment; and they were
affrighted. 16:6 And he saith unto them, Be not affrighted: Ye seek Jesus of
Nazareth, which was crucified: he is risen; he is not here: behold the
place where they laid him. 16:7 But go your way, tell his disciples and Peter that he goeth
before you into Galilee: there shall ye see him, as he said unto you. 16:8 And they went out quickly, and fled from the sepulchre; for they
trembled and were amazed: neither said they any thing to any man; for
they were afraid. 16:9 Now when Jesus was risen early the first day of the week, he
appeared first to Mary Magdalene, out of whom he had cast seven
devils. 16:10 And she went and told them that had been with him, as they
mourned and wept. 16:11 And they, when they had heard that he was alive, and had been
seen of her, believed not. 16:12 After that he appeared in another form unto two of them, as they
walked, and went into the country. 16:13 And they went and told it unto the residue: neither believed
they them. 16:14 Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat, and
upbraided them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they
believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. 16:15 And he said unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature. 16:16 He that believeth and is baptized shall be saved; but he that
believeth not shall be damned. 16:17 And these signs shall follow them that believe; In my name shall
they cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; 16:18 They
shall take up serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall
not hurt them; they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall
recover. 16:19 So then after the Lord had spoken unto them, he was received up
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God. 16:20 And they went forth, and preached every where, the Lord working
with them, and confirming the word with signs following. Amen. The Gospel According to Saint Luke


1:1 Forasmuch as many have taken in hand to set forth in order a
declaration of those things which are most surely believed among us,
1:2 Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses, and ministers of the word; 1:3 It seemed good to me
also, having had perfect understanding of all things from the very
first, to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus, 1:4
That thou mightest know the certainty of those things, wherein thou
hast been instructed. 1:5 THERE was in the days of Herod, the king of Judaea, a certain
priest named Zacharias, of the course of Abia: and his wife was of the
daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elisabeth. 1:6 And they were both righteous before God, walking in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless. 1:7 And they had no child, because that Elisabeth was barren, and they
both were now well stricken in years. 1:8 And it came to pass, that while he executed the priest's office
before God in the order of his course, 1:9 According to the custom of
the priest's office, his lot was to burn incense when he went into the
temple of the Lord. 1:10 And the whole multitude of the people were praying without at the
time of incense. 1:11 And there appeared unto him an angel of the Lord standing on the
right side of the altar of incense. 1:12 And when Zacharias saw him, he was troubled, and fear fell upon
him. 1:13 But the angel said unto him, Fear not, Zacharias: for thy prayer
is heard; and thy wife Elisabeth shall bear thee a son, and thou shalt
call his name John. 1:14 And thou shalt have joy and gladness; and many shall rejoice at
his birth. 1:15 For he shall be great in the sight of the Lord, and shall drink
neither wine nor strong drink; and he shall be filled with the Holy
Ghost, even from his mother's womb. 1:16 And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord
their God. 1:17 And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to
turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the disobedient to
the wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord. 1:18 And Zacharias said unto the angel, Whereby shall I know this? for
I am an old man, and my wife well stricken in years. 1:19 And the angel answering said unto him, I am Gabriel, that stand
in the presence of God; and am sent to speak unto thee, and to shew
thee these glad tidings. 1:20 And, behold, thou shalt be dumb, and not able to speak, until the
day that these things shall be performed, because thou believest not
my words, which shall be fulfilled in their season. 1:21 And the people waited for Zacharias, and marvelled that he
tarried so long in the temple. 1:22 And when he came out, he could not speak unto them: and they
perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple: for he beckoned
unto them, and remained speechless. 1:23 And it came to pass, that, as soon as the days of his
ministration were accomplished, he departed to his own house. 1:24 And after those days his wife Elisabeth conceived, and hid
herself five months, saying, 1:25 Thus hath the Lord dealt with me in
the days wherein he looked on me, to take away my reproach among men. 1:26 And in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent from God unto a
city of Galilee, named Nazareth, 1:27 To a virgin espoused to a man
whose name was Joseph, of the house of David; and the virgin's name
was Mary. 1:28 And the angel came in unto her, and said, Hail, thou that art
highly favoured, the Lord is with thee: blessed art thou among women. 1:29 And when she saw him, she was troubled at his saying, and cast in
her mind what manner of salutation this should be. 1:30 And the angel said unto her, Fear not, Mary: for thou hast found
favour with God. 1:31 And, behold, thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a
son, and shalt call his name JESUS. 1:32 He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the Highest:
and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David:
1:33 And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his
kingdom there shall be no end. 1:34 Then said Mary unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know
not a man? 1:35 And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall
overshadow thee: therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of
thee shall be called the Son of God. 1:36 And, behold, thy cousin Elisabeth, she hath also conceived a son
in her old age: and this is the sixth month with her, who was called
barren. 1:37 For with God nothing shall be impossible. 1:38 And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me
according to thy word. And the angel departed from her. 1:39 And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill country with
haste, into a city of Juda; 1:40 And entered into the house of
Zacharias, and saluted Elisabeth. 1:41 And it came to pass, that, when Elisabeth heard the salutation of
Mary, the babe leaped in her womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the
Holy Ghost: 1:42 And she spake out with a loud voice, and said,
Blessed art thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 1:43 And whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come
to me? 1:44 For, lo, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded
in mine ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. 1:45 And blessed is she that believed: for there shall be a
performance of those things which were told her from the Lord. 1:46 And Mary said, My soul doth magnify the Lord, 1:47 And my spirit
hath rejoiced in God my Saviour. 1:48 For he hath regarded the low estate of his handmaiden: for,
behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. 1:49 For he that is mighty hath done to me great things; and holy is
his name. 1:50 And his mercy is on them that fear him from generation to
generation. 1:51 He hath shewed strength with his arm; he hath scattered the proud
in the imagination of their hearts. 1:52 He hath put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of
low degree. 1:53 He hath filled the hungry with good things; and the rich he hath
sent empty away. 1:54 He hath holpen his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy;
1:55 As he spake to our fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever. 1:56 And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned to her
own house. 1:57 Now Elisabeth's full time came that she should be delivered; and
she brought forth a son. 1:58 And her neighbours and her cousins heard how the Lord had shewed
great mercy upon her; and they rejoiced with her. 1:59 And it came to pass, that on the eighth day they came to
circumcise the child; and they called him Zacharias, after the name of
his father. 1:60 And his mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be called
John. 1:61 And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is
called by this name. 1:62 And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called. 1:63 And he asked for a writing table, and wrote, saying, His name is
John. And they marvelled all. 1:64 And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue loosed, and
he spake, and praised God. 1:65 And fear came on all that dwelt round about them: and all these
sayings were noised abroad throughout all the hill country of Judaea. 1:66 And all they that heard them laid them up in their hearts,
saying, What manner of child shall this be! And the hand of the Lord
was with him. 1:67 And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Ghost, and
prophesied, saying, 1:68 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he
hath visited and redeemed his people, 1:69 And hath raised up an horn
of salvation for us in the house of his servant David; 1:70 As he
spake by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been since the
world began: 1:71 That we should be saved from our enemies, and from
the hand of all that hate us; 1:72 To perform the mercy promised to
our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant; 1:73 The oath which he
sware to our father Abraham, 1:74 That he would grant unto us, that we
being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without
fear, 1:75 In holiness and righteousness before him, all the days of
our life. 1:76 And thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest: for
thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways; 1:77 To
give knowledge of salvation unto his people by the remission of their
sins, 1:78 Through the tender mercy of our God; whereby the dayspring
from on high hath visited us, 1:79 To give light to them that sit in
darkness and in the shadow of death, to guide our feet into the way of
peace. 1:80 And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the
deserts till the day of his shewing unto Israel. 2:1 And it came to pass in those days, that there went out a decree
from Caesar Augustus that all the world should be taxed. 2:2 (And this taxing was first made when Cyrenius was governor of
Syria.) 2:3 And all went to be taxed, every one into his own city. 2:4 And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth,
into Judaea, unto the city of David, which is called Bethlehem;
(because he was of the house and lineage of David:) 2:5 To be taxed
with Mary his espoused wife, being great with child. 2:6 And so it was, that, while they were there, the days were
accomplished that she should be delivered. 2:7 And she brought forth her firstborn son, and wrapped him in
swaddling clothes, and laid him in a manger; because there was no room
for them in the inn. 2:8 And there were in the same country shepherds abiding in the field,
keeping watch over their flock by night. 2:9 And, lo, the angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory of
the Lord shone round about them: and they were sore afraid. 2:10 And the angel said unto them, Fear not: for, behold, I bring you
good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. 2:11 For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour,
which is Christ the Lord. 2:12 And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped
in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger. 2:13 And suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly
host praising God, and saying, 2:14 Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men. 2:15 And it came to pass, as the angels were gone away from them into
heaven, the shepherds said one to another, Let us now go even unto
Bethlehem, and see this thing which is come to pass, which the Lord
hath made known unto us. 2:16 And they came with haste, and found Mary, and Joseph, and the
babe lying in a manger. 2:17 And when they had seen it, they made known abroad the saying
which was told them concerning this child. 2:18 And all they that heard it wondered at those things which were
told them by the shepherds. 2:19 But Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart. 2:20 And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all
the things that they had heard and seen, as it was told unto them. 2:21 And when eight days were accomplished for the circumcising of the
child, his name was called JESUS, which was so named of the angel
before he was conceived in the womb. 2:22 And when the days of her purification according to the law of
Moses were accomplished, they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him
to the Lord; 2:23 (As it is written in the law of the LORD, Every male
that openeth the womb shall be called holy to the Lord;) 2:24 And to
offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in the law of the
Lord, A pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons. 2:25 And, behold, there was a man in Jerusalem, whose name was Simeon;
and the same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of
Israel: and the Holy Ghost was upon him. 2:26 And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Ghost, that he should
not see death, before he had seen the Lord's Christ. 2:27 And he came by the Spirit into the temple: and when the parents
brought in the child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the law,
2:28 Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God, and said, 2:29
Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy
word: 2:30 For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, 2:31 Which thou hast
prepared before the face of all people; 2:32 A light to lighten the
Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. 2:33 And Joseph and his mother marvelled at those things which were
spoken of him. 2:34 And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold,
this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel; and
for a sign which shall be spoken against; 2:35 (Yea, a sword shall
pierce through thy own soul also,) that the thoughts of many hearts
may be revealed. 2:36 And there was one Anna, a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel, of
the tribe of Aser: she was of a great age, and had lived with an
husband seven years from her virginity; 2:37 And she was a widow of
about fourscore and four years, which departed not from the temple,
but served God with fastings and prayers night and day. 2:38 And she coming in that instant gave thanks likewise unto the
Lord, and spake of him to all them that looked for redemption in
Jerusalem. 2:39 And when they had performed all things according to the law of
the Lord, they returned into Galilee, to their own city Nazareth. 2:40 And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with
wisdom: and the grace of God was upon him. 2:41 Now his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the
passover. 2:42 And when he was twelve years old, they went up to Jerusalem after
the custom of the feast. 2:43 And when they had fulfilled the days, as they returned, the child
Jesus tarried behind in Jerusalem; and Joseph and his mother knew not
of it. 2:44 But they, supposing him to have been in the company, went a day's
journey; and they sought him among their kinsfolk and acquaintance. 2:45 And when they found him not, they turned back again to Jerusalem,
seeking him. 2:46 And it came to pass, that after three days they found him in the
temple, sitting in the midst of the doctors, both hearing them, and
asking them questions. 2:47 And all that heard him were astonished at his understanding and
answers. 2:48 And when they saw him, they were amazed: and his mother said unto
him, Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? behold, thy father and I
have sought thee sorrowing. 2:49 And he said unto them, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not
that I must be about my Father's business? 2:50 And they understood
not the saying which he spake unto them. 2:51 And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was subject
unto them: but his mother kept all these sayings in her heart. 2:52 And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God
and man. 3:1 Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius
Pilate being governor of Judaea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee,
and his brother Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and of the region of
Trachonitis, and Lysanias the tetrarch of Abilene, 3:2 Annas and
Caiaphas being the high priests, the word of God came unto John the
son of Zacharias in the wilderness. 3:3 And he came into all the country about Jordan, preaching the
baptism of repentance for the remission of sins; 3:4 As it is written
in the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying, The voice of
one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
paths straight. 3:5 Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain and hill shall be
brought low; and the crooked shall be made straight, and the rough
ways shall be made smooth; 3:6 And all flesh shall see the salvation
of God. 3:7 Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of
him, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the
wrath to come? 3:8 Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance,
and begin not to say within yourselves, We have Abraham to our father:
for I say unto you, That God is able of these stones to raise up
children unto Abraham. 3:9 And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees: every
tree therefore which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and
cast into the fire. 3:10 And the people asked him, saying, What shall we do then? 3:11 He
answereth and saith unto them, He that hath two coats, let him impart
to him that hath none; and he that hath meat, let him do likewise. 3:12 Then came also publicans to be baptized, and said unto him,
Master, what shall we do? 3:13 And he said unto them, Exact no more
than that which is appointed you. 3:14 And the soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what shall
we do? And he said unto them, Do violence to no man, neither accuse
any falsely; and be content with your wages. 3:15 And as the people were in expectation, and all men mused in their
hearts of John, whether he were the Christ, or not; 3:16 John
answered, saying unto them all, I indeed baptize you with water; but
one mightier than I cometh, the latchet of whose shoes I am not worthy
to unloose: he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire:
3:17 Whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor,
and will gather the wheat into his garner; but the chaff he will burn
with fire unquenchable. 3:18 And many other things in his exhortation preached he unto the
people. 3:19 But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him for Herodias his
brother Philip's wife, and for all the evils which Herod had done,
3:20 Added yet this above all, that he shut up John in prison. 3:21 Now when all the people were baptized, it came to pass, that
Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened, 3:22
And the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him,
and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in
thee I am well pleased. 3:23 And Jesus himself began to be about thirty years of age, being
(as was supposed) the son of Joseph, which was the son of Heli, 3:24
Which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, which was the
son of Melchi, which was the son of Janna, which was the son of
Joseph, 3:25 Which was the son of Mattathias, which was the son of
Amos, which was the son of Naum, which was the son of Esli, which was
the son of Nagge, 3:26 Which was the son of Maath, which was the son
of Mattathias, which was the son of Semei, which was the son of
Joseph, which was the son of Juda, 3:27 Which was the son of Joanna,
which was the son of Rhesa, which was the son of Zorobabel, which was
the son of Salathiel, which was the son of Neri, 3:28 Which was the
son of Melchi, which was the son of Addi, which was the son of Cosam,
which was the son of Elmodam, which was the son of Er, 3:29 Which was
the son of Jose, which was the son of Eliezer, which was the son of
Jorim, which was the son of Matthat, which was the son of Levi, 3:30
Which was the son of Simeon, which was the son of Juda, which was the
son of Joseph, which was the son of Jonan, which was the son of
Eliakim, 3:31 Which was the son of Melea, which was the son of Menan,
which was the son of Mattatha, which was the son of Nathan, which was
the son of David, 3:32 Which was the son of Jesse, which was the son
of Obed, which was the son of Booz, which was the son of Salmon, which
was the son of Naasson, 3:33 Which was the son of Aminadab, which was
the son of Aram, which was the son of Esrom, which was the son of
Phares, which was the son of Juda, 3:34 Which was the son of Jacob,
which was the son of Isaac, which was the son of Abraham, which was
the son of Thara, which was the son of Nachor, 3:35 Which was the son
of Saruch, which was the son of Ragau, which was the son of Phalec,
which was the son of Heber, which was the son of Sala, 3:36 Which was
the son of Cainan, which was the son of Arphaxad, which was the son of
Sem, which was the son of Noe, which was the son of Lamech, 3:37 Which
was the son of Mathusala, which was the son of Enoch, which was the
son of Jared, which was the son of Maleleel, which was the son of
Cainan, 3:38 Which was the son of Enos, which was the son of Seth,
which was the son of Adam, which was the son of God. 4:1 And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost returned from Jordan, and
was led by the Spirit into the wilderness, 4:2 Being forty days
tempted of the devil. And in those days he did eat nothing: and when
they were ended, he afterward hungered. 4:3 And the devil said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, command
this stone that it be made bread. 4:4 And Jesus answered him, saying, It is written, That man shall not
live by bread alone, but by every word of God. 4:5 And the devil, taking him up into an high mountain, shewed unto
him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. 4:6 And the devil said unto him, All this power will I give thee, and
the glory of them: for that is delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I
will I give it. 4:7 If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine. 4:8 And Jesus answered and said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan:
for it is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shalt thou serve. 4:9 And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pinnacle of the
temple, and said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, cast thyself
down from hence: 4:10 For it is written, He shall give his angels
charge over thee, to keep thee: 4:11 And in their hands they shall
bear thee up, lest at any time thou dash thy foot against a stone. 4:12 And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, Thou shalt not
tempt the Lord thy God. 4:13 And when the devil had ended all the temptation, he departed from
him for a season. 4:14 And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and
there went out a fame of him through all the region round about. 4:15 And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all. 4:16 And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and, as
his custom was, he went into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and
stood up for to read. 4:17 And there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias. And when he had opened the book, he found the place where it was
written, 4:18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath
anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal
the brokenhearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised, 4:19 To preach the acceptable year of the Lord. 4:20 And he closed the book, and he gave it again to the minister, and
sat down. And the eyes of all them that were in the synagogue were
fastened on him. 4:21 And he began to say unto them, This day is this scripture
fulfilled in your ears. 4:22 And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is not this Joseph's
son? 4:23 And he said unto them, Ye will surely say unto me this
proverb, Physician, heal thyself: whatsoever we have heard done in
Capernaum, do also here in thy country. 4:24 And he said, Verily I say unto you, No prophet is accepted in his
own country. 4:25 But I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days
of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when
great famine was throughout all the land; 4:26 But unto none of them
was Elias sent, save unto Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that
was a widow. 4:27 And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the
prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian. 4:28 And all they in the synagogue, when they heard these things, were
filled with wrath, 4:29 And rose up, and thrust him out of the city,
and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built,
that they might cast him down headlong. 4:30 But he passing through the midst of them went his way, 4:31 And
came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee, and taught them on the
sabbath days. 4:32 And they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with
power. 4:33 And in the synagogue there was a man, which had a spirit of an
unclean devil, and cried out with a loud voice, 4:34 Saying, Let us
alone; what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou
come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art; the Holy One of God. 4:35 And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of
him. And when the devil had thrown him in the midst, he came out of him,
and hurt him not. 4:36 And they were all amazed, and spake among themselves, saying,
What a word is this! for with authority and power he commandeth the
unclean spirits, and they come out. 4:37 And the fame of him went out into every place of the country
round about. 4:38 And he arose out of the synagogue, and entered into Simon's
house. And Simon's wife's mother was taken with a great fever; and they
besought him for her. 4:39 And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever; and it left her:
and immediately she arose and ministered unto them. 4:40 Now when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with
divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on every
one of them, and healed them. 4:41 And devils also came out of many, crying out, and saying, Thou
art Christ the Son of God. And he rebuking them suffered them not to
speak: for they knew that he was Christ. 4:42 And when it was day, he departed and went into a desert place:
and the people sought him, and came unto him, and stayed him, that he
should not depart from them. 4:43 And he said unto them, I must preach the kingdom of God to other
cities also: for therefore am I sent. 4:44 And he preached in the synagogues of Galilee. 5:1 And it came to pass, that, as the people pressed upon him to hear
the word of God, he stood by the lake of Gennesaret, 5:2 And saw two
ships standing by the lake: but the fishermen were gone out of them,
and were washing their nets. 5:3 And he entered into one of the ships, which was Simon's, and
prayed him that he would thrust out a little from the land. And he sat
down, and taught the people out of the ship. 5:4 Now when he had left speaking, he said unto Simon, Launch out into
the deep, and let down your nets for a draught. 5:5 And Simon answering said unto him, Master, we have toiled all the
night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless at thy word I will let
down the net. 5:6 And when they had this done, they inclosed a great multitude of
fishes: and their net brake. 5:7 And they beckoned unto their partners, which were in the other
ship, that they should come and help them. And they came, and filled
both the ships, so that they began to sink. 5:8 When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying,
Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord. 5:9 For he was astonished, and all that were with him, at the draught
of the fishes which they had taken: 5:10 And so was also James, and
John, the sons of Zebedee, which were partners with Simon. And Jesus
said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men. 5:11 And when they had brought their ships to land, they forsook all,
and followed him. 5:12 And it came to pass, when he was in a certain city, behold a man
full of leprosy: who seeing Jesus fell on his face, and besought him,
saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. 5:13 And he put forth his hand, and touched him, saying, I will: be
thou clean. And immediately the leprosy departed from him. 5:14 And he charged him to tell no man: but go, and shew thyself to
the priest, and offer for thy cleansing, according as Moses commanded,
for a testimony unto them. 5:15 But so much the more went there a fame abroad of him: and great
multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him of their
infirmities. 5:16 And he withdrew himself into the wilderness, and prayed. 5:17 And it came to pass on a certain day, as he was teaching, that
there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, which were
come out of every town of Galilee, and Judaea, and Jerusalem: and the
power of the Lord was present to heal them. 5:18 And, behold, men brought in a bed a man which was taken with a
palsy: and they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him before
him. 5:19 And when they could not find by what way they might bring him in
because of the multitude, they went upon the housetop, and let him
down through the tiling with his couch into the midst before Jesus. 5:20 And when he saw their faith, he said unto him, Man, thy sins are
forgiven thee. 5:21 And the scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is
this which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone? 5:22 But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, he answering said unto
them, What reason ye in your hearts? 5:23 Whether is easier, to say,
Thy sins be forgiven thee; or to say, Rise up and walk? 5:24 But that
ye may know that the Son of man hath power upon earth to forgive sins,
(he said unto the sick of the palsy,) I say unto thee, Arise, and take
up thy couch, and go into thine house. 5:25 And immediately he rose up before them, and took up that whereon
he lay, and departed to his own house, glorifying God. 5:26 And they were all amazed, and they glorified God, and were filled
with fear, saying, We have seen strange things to day. 5:27 And after these things he went forth, and saw a publican, named
Levi, sitting at the receipt of custom: and he said unto him, Follow
me. 5:28 And he left all, rose up, and followed him. 5:29 And Levi made him a great feast in his own house: and there was a
great company of publicans and of others that sat down with them. 5:30 But their scribes and Pharisees murmured against his disciples,
saying, Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners? 5:31 And
Jesus answering said unto them, They that are whole need not a
physician; but they that are sick. 5:32 I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. 5:33 And they said unto him, Why do the disciples of John fast often,
and make prayers, and likewise the disciples of the Pharisees; but
thine eat and drink? 5:34 And he said unto them, Can ye make the
children of the bridechamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? 5:35 But the days will come, when the bridegroom shall be taken away
from them, and then shall they fast in those days. 5:36 And he spake also a parable unto them; No man putteth a piece of
a new garment upon an old; if otherwise, then both the new maketh a
rent, and the piece that was taken out of the new agreeth not with the
old. 5:37 And no man putteth new wine into old bottles; else the new wine
will burst the bottles, and be spilled, and the bottles shall perish. 5:38 But new wine must be put into new bottles; and both are
preserved. 5:39 No man also having drunk old wine straightway desireth new: for
he saith, The old is better. 6:1 And it came to pass on the second sabbath after the first, that he
went through the corn fields; and his disciples plucked the ears of
corn, and did eat, rubbing them in their hands. 6:2 And certain of the Pharisees said unto them, Why do ye that which
is not lawful to do on the sabbath days? 6:3 And Jesus answering them
said, Have ye not read so much as this, what David did, when himself
was an hungred, and they which were with him; 6:4 How he went into the
house of God, and did take and eat the shewbread, and gave also to
them that were with him; which it is not lawful to eat but for the
priests alone? 6:5 And he said unto them, That the Son of man is Lord
also of the sabbath. 6:6 And it came to pass also on another sabbath, that he entered into
the synagogue and taught: and there was a man whose right hand was
withered. 6:7 And the scribes and Pharisees watched him, whether he would heal
on the sabbath day; that they might find an accusation against him. 6:8 But he knew their thoughts, and said to the man which had the
withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And he arose and
stood forth. 6:9 Then said Jesus unto them, I will ask you one thing; Is it lawful
on the sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? to save life, or to
destroy it? 6:10 And looking round about upon them all, he said unto
the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did so: and his hand was
restored whole as the other. 6:11 And they were filled with madness; and communed one with another
what they might do to Jesus. 6:12 And it came to pass in those days, that he went out into a
mountain to pray, and continued all night in prayer to God. 6:13 And when it was day, he called unto him his disciples: and of
them he chose twelve, whom also he named apostles; 6:14 Simon, (whom
he also named Peter,) and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip
and Bartholomew, 6:15 Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus,
and Simon called Zelotes, 6:16 And Judas the brother of James, and
Judas Iscariot, which also was the traitor. 6:17 And he came down with them, and stood in the plain, and the
company of his disciples, and a great multitude of people out of all
Judaea and Jerusalem, and from the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon, which
came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; 6:18 And they
that were vexed with unclean spirits: and they were healed. 6:19 And the whole multitude sought to touch him: for there went
virtue out of him, and healed them all. 6:20 And he lifted up his eyes on his disciples, and said, Blessed be
ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. 6:21 Blessed are ye that hunger now: for ye shall be filled. Blessed
are ye that weep now: for ye shall laugh. 6:22 Blessed are ye, when men shall hate you, and when they shall
separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast out
your name as evil, for the Son of man's sake. 6:23 Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your
reward is great in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers
unto the prophets. 6:24 But woe unto you that are rich! for ye have received your
consolation. 6:25 Woe unto you that are full! for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you
that laugh now! for ye shall mourn and weep. 6:26 Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you! for so did
their fathers to the false prophets. 6:27 But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, do good to them
which hate you, 6:28 Bless them that curse you, and pray for them
which despitefully use you. 6:29 And unto him that smiteth thee on the one cheek offer also the
other; and him that taketh away thy cloak forbid not to take thy coat
also. 6:30 Give to every man that asketh of thee; and of him that taketh
away thy goods ask them not again. 6:31 And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them
likewise. 6:32 For if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? for
sinners also love those that love them. 6:33 And if ye do good to them which do good to you, what thank have
ye? for sinners also do even the same. 6:34 And if ye lend to them of whom ye hope to receive, what thank
have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to receive as much again. 6:35 But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for
nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the
children of the Highest: for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the
evil. 6:36 Be ye therefore merciful, as your Father also is merciful. 6:37 Judge not, and ye shall not be judged: condemn not, and ye shall
not be condemned: forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: 6:38 Give, and it
shall be given unto you; good measure, pressed down, and shaken
together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. For with
the same measure that ye mete withal it shall be measured to you
again. 6:39 And he spake a parable unto them, Can the blind lead the blind? shall they not both fall into the ditch? 6:40 The disciple is not
above his master: but every one that is perfect shall be as his
master. 6:41 And why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye, but
perceivest not the beam that is in thine own eye? 6:42 Either how
canst thou say to thy brother, Brother, let me pull out the mote that
is in thine eye, when thou thyself beholdest not the beam that is in
thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine
own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to pull out the mote that is
in thy brother's eye. 6:43 For a good tree bringeth not forth corrupt fruit; neither doth a
corrupt tree bring forth good fruit. 6:44 For every tree is known by his own fruit. For of thorns men do
not gather figs, nor of a bramble bush gather they grapes. 6:45 A good man out of the good treasure of his heart bringeth forth
that which is good; and an evil man out of the evil treasure of his
heart bringeth forth that which is evil: for of the abundance of the
heart his mouth speaketh. 6:46 And why call ye me, Lord, Lord, and do not the things which I
say? 6:47 Whosoever cometh to me, and heareth my sayings, and doeth
them, I will shew you to whom he is like: 6:48 He is like a man which
built an house, and digged deep, and laid the foundation on a rock:
and when the flood arose, the stream beat vehemently upon that house,
and could not shake it: for it was founded upon a rock. 6:49 But he that heareth, and doeth not, is like a man that without a
foundation built an house upon the earth; against which the stream did
beat vehemently, and immediately it fell; and the ruin of that house
was great. 7:1 Now when he had ended all his sayings in the audience of the
people, he entered into Capernaum. 7:2 And a certain centurion's servant, who was dear unto him, was
sick, and ready to die. 7:3 And when he heard of Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the
Jews, beseeching him that he would come and heal his servant. 7:4 And when they came to Jesus, they besought him instantly, saying,
That he was worthy for whom he should do this: 7:5 For he loveth our
nation, and he hath built us a synagogue. 7:6 Then Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far from the
house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying unto him, Lord,
trouble not thyself: for I am not worthy that thou shouldest enter
under my roof: 7:7 Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy to come
unto thee: but say in a word, and my servant shall be healed. 7:8 For I also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers,
and I say unto one, Go, and he goeth; and to another, Come, and he
cometh; and to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. 7:9 When Jesus heard these things, he marvelled at him, and turned him
about, and said unto the people that followed him, I say unto you, I
have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. 7:10 And they that were sent, returning to the house, found the
servant whole that had been sick. 7:11 And it came to pass the day after, that he went into a city
called Nain; and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. 7:12 Now when he came nigh to the gate of the city, behold, there was
a dead man carried out, the only son of his mother, and she was a
widow: and much people of the city was with her. 7:13 And when the Lord saw her, he had compassion on her, and said
unto her, Weep not. 7:14 And he came and touched the bier: and they that bare him stood
still. And he said, Young man, I say unto thee, Arise. 7:15 And he that was dead sat up, and began to speak. And he delivered
him to his mother. 7:16 And there came a fear on all: and they glorified God, saying,
That a great prophet is risen up among us; and, That God hath visited
his people. 7:17 And this rumour of him went forth throughout all Judaea, and
throughout all the region round about. 7:18 And the disciples of John shewed him of all these things. 7:19 And John calling unto him two of his disciples sent them to
Jesus, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we for another? 7:20 When the men were come unto him, they said, John Baptist hath
sent us unto thee, saying, Art thou he that should come? or look we
for another? 7:21 And in that same hour he cured many of their
infirmities and plagues, and of evil spirits; and unto many that were
blind he gave sight. 7:22 Then Jesus answering said unto them, Go your way, and tell John
what things ye have seen and heard; how that the blind see, the lame
walk, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to
the poor the gospel is preached. 7:23 And blessed is he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. 7:24 And when the messengers of John were departed, he began to speak
unto the people concerning John, What went ye out into the wilderness
for to see? A reed shaken with the wind? 7:25 But what went ye out
for to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, they which are
gorgeously apparelled, and live delicately, are in kings' courts. 7:26 But what went ye out for to see? A prophet? Yea, I say unto you,
and much more than a prophet. 7:27 This is he, of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger
before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. 7:28 For I say unto you, Among those that are born of women there is
not a greater prophet than John the Baptist: but he that is least in
the kingdom of God is greater than he. 7:29 And all the people that heard him, and the publicans, justified
God, being baptized with the baptism of John. 7:30 But the Pharisees and lawyers rejected the counsel of God against
themselves, being not baptized of him. 7:31 And the Lord said, Whereunto then shall I liken the men of this
generation? and to what are they like? 7:32 They are like unto
children sitting in the marketplace, and calling one to another, and
saying, We have piped unto you, and ye have not danced; we have
mourned to you, and ye have not wept. 7:33 For John the Baptist came neither eating bread nor drinking wine;
and ye say, He hath a devil. 7:34 The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold a
gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and sinners! 7:35 But wisdom is justified of all her children. 7:36 And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with him. And he went into the Pharisee's house, and sat down to meat. 7:37 And, behold, a woman in the city, which was a sinner, when she
knew that Jesus sat at meat in the Pharisee's house, brought an
alabaster box of ointment, 7:38 And stood at his feet behind him
weeping, and began to wash his feet with tears, and did wipe them with
the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the
ointment. 7:39 Now when the Pharisee which had bidden him saw it, he spake
within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would have
known who and what manner of woman this is that toucheth him: for she
is a sinner. 7:40 And Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say
unto thee. And he saith, Master, say on. 7:41 There was a certain creditor which had two debtors: the one owed
five hundred pence, and the other fifty. 7:42 And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave them both. Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most? 7:43 Simon
answered and said, I suppose that he, to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him, Thou hast rightly judged. 7:44 And he turned to the woman, and said unto Simon, Seest thou this
woman? I entered into thine house, thou gavest me no water for my
feet: but she hath washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with the
hairs of her head. 7:45 Thou gavest me no kiss: but this woman since the time I came in
hath not ceased to kiss my feet. 7:46 My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but this woman hath
anointed my feet with ointment. 7:47 Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are
forgiven; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same
loveth little. 7:48 And he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. 7:49 And they that sat at meat with him began to say within
themselves, Who is this that forgiveth sins also? 7:50 And he said to
the woman, Thy faith hath saved thee; go in peace. 8:1 And it came to pass afterward, that he went throughout every city
and village, preaching and shewing the glad tidings of the kingdom of
God: and the twelve were with him, 8:2 And certain women, which had
been healed of evil spirits and infirmities, Mary called Magdalene,
out of whom went seven devils, 8:3 And Joanna the wife of Chuza
Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, which ministered unto
him of their substance. 8:4 And when much people were gathered together, and were come to him
out of every city, he spake by a parable: 8:5 A sower went out to sow
his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and it was
trodden down, and the fowls of the air devoured it. 8:6 And some fell upon a rock; and as soon as it was sprung up, it
withered away, because it lacked moisture. 8:7 And some fell among thorns; and the thorns sprang up with it, and
choked it. 8:8 And other fell on good ground, and sprang up, and bare fruit an
hundredfold. And when he had said these things, he cried, He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear. 8:9 And his disciples asked him, saying, What might this parable be? 8:10 And he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of God: but to others in parables; that seeing they might not
see, and hearing they might not understand. 8:11 Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God. 8:12 Those by the way side are they that hear; then cometh the devil,
and taketh away the word out of their hearts, lest they should believe
and be saved. 8:13 They on the rock are they, which, when they hear, receive the
word with joy; and these have no root, which for a while believe, and
in time of temptation fall away. 8:14 And that which fell among thorns are they, which, when they have
heard, go forth, and are choked with cares and riches and pleasures of
this life, and bring no fruit to perfection. 8:15 But that on the good ground are they, which in an honest and good
heart, having heard the word, keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience. 8:16 No man, when he hath lighted a candle, covereth it with a vessel,
or putteth it under a bed; but setteth it on a candlestick, that they
which enter in may see the light. 8:17 For nothing is secret, that shall not be made manifest; neither
any thing hid, that shall not be known and come abroad. 8:18 Take heed therefore how ye hear: for whosoever hath, to him shall
be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that
which he seemeth to have. 8:19 Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come
at him for the press. 8:20 And it was told him by certain which said, Thy mother and thy
brethren stand without, desiring to see thee. 8:21 And he answered and said unto them, My mother and my brethren are
these which hear the word of God, and do it. 8:22 Now it came to pass on a certain day, that he went into a ship
with his disciples: and he said unto them, Let us go over unto the
other side of the lake. And they launched forth. 8:23 But as they sailed he fell asleep: and there came down a storm of
wind on the lake; and they were filled with water, and were in
jeopardy. 8:24 And they came to him, and awoke him, saying, Master, master, we
perish. Then he arose, and rebuked the wind and the raging of the
water: and they ceased, and there was a calm. 8:25 And he said unto them, Where is your faith? And they being afraid
wondered, saying one to another, What manner of man is this! for he
commandeth even the winds and water, and they obey him. 8:26 And they arrived at the country of the Gadarenes, which is over
against Galilee. 8:27 And when he went forth to land, there met him out of the city a
certain man, which had devils long time, and ware no clothes, neither
abode in any house, but in the tombs. 8:28 When he saw Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and
with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son
of God most high? I beseech thee, torment me not. 8:29 (For he had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. For oftentimes it had caught him: and he was kept bound with chains
and in fetters; and he brake the bands, and was driven of the devil
into the wilderness.) 8:30 And Jesus asked him, saying, What is thy
name? And he said, Legion: because many devils were entered into him. 8:31 And they besought him that he would not command them to go out
into the deep. 8:32 And there was there an herd of many swine feeding on the
mountain: and they besought him that he would suffer them to enter
into them. And he suffered them. 8:33 Then went the devils out of the man, and entered into the swine:
and the herd ran violently down a steep place into the lake, and were
choked. 8:34 When they that fed them saw what was done, they fled, and went
and told it in the city and in the country. 8:35 Then they went out to see what was done; and came to Jesus, and
found the man, out of whom the devils were departed, sitting at the
feet of Jesus, clothed, and in his right mind: and they were afraid. 8:36 They also which saw it told them by what means he that was
possessed of the devils was healed. 8:37 Then the whole multitude of the country of the Gadarenes round
about besought him to depart from them; for they were taken with great
fear: and he went up into the ship, and returned back again. 8:38 Now the man out of whom the devils were departed besought him
that he might be with him: but Jesus sent him away, saying, 8:39
Return to thine own house, and shew how great things God hath done
unto thee. And he went his way, and published throughout the whole
city how great things Jesus had done unto him. 8:40 And it came to pass, that, when Jesus was returned, the people
gladly received him: for they were all waiting for him. 8:41 And, behold, there came a man named Jairus, and he was a ruler of
the synagogue: and he fell down at Jesus' feet, and besought him that
he would come into his house: 8:42 For he had one only daughter, about
twelve years of age, and she lay a dying. But as he went the people
thronged him. 8:43 And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, which had
spent all her living upon physicians, neither could be healed of any,
8:44 Came behind him, and touched the border of his garment: and
immediately her issue of blood stanched. 8:45 And Jesus said, Who touched me? When all denied, Peter and they
that were with him said, Master, the multitude throng thee and press
thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me? 8:46 And Jesus said, Somebody
hath touched me: for I perceive that virtue is gone out of me. 8:47 And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling,
and falling down before him, she declared unto him before all the
people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was healed
immediately. 8:48 And he said unto her, Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith
hath made thee whole; go in peace. 8:49 While he yet spake, there cometh one from the ruler of the
synagogue's house, saying to him, Thy daughter is dead; trouble not
the Master. 8:50 But when Jesus heard it, he answered him, saying, Fear not:
believe only, and she shall be made whole. 8:51 And when he came into the house, he suffered no man to go in,
save Peter, and James, and John, and the father and the mother of the
maiden. 8:52 And all wept, and bewailed her: but he said, Weep not; she is not
dead, but sleepeth. 8:53 And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. 8:54 And he put them all out, and took her by the hand, and called,
saying, Maid, arise. 8:55 And her spirit came again, and she arose straightway: and he
commanded to give her meat. 8:56 And her parents were astonished: but he charged them that they
should tell no man what was done. 9:1 Then he called his twelve disciples together, and gave them power
and authority over all devils, and to cure diseases. 9:2 And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal the
sick. 9:3 And he said unto them, Take nothing for your journey, neither
staves, nor scrip, neither bread, neither money; neither have two
coats apiece. 9:4 And whatsoever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence
depart. 9:5 And whosoever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city,
shake off the very dust from your feet for a testimony against them. 9:6 And they departed, and went through the towns, preaching the
gospel, and healing every where. 9:7 Now Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him: and he
was perplexed, because that it was said of some, that John was risen
from the dead; 9:8 And of some, that Elias had appeared; and of
others, that one of the old prophets was risen again. 9:9 And Herod said, John have I beheaded: but who is this, of whom I
hear such things? And he desired to see him. 9:10 And the apostles, when they were returned, told him all that they
had done. And he took them, and went aside privately into a desert
place belonging to the city called Bethsaida. 9:11 And the people, when they knew it, followed him: and he received
them, and spake unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that
had need of healing. 9:12 And when the day began to wear away, then came the twelve, and
said unto him, Send the multitude away, that they may go into the
towns and country round about, and lodge, and get victuals: for we are
here in a desert place. 9:13 But he said unto them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, We
have no more but five loaves and two fishes; except we should go and
buy meat for all this people. 9:14 For they were about five thousand men. And he said to his
disciples, Make them sit down by fifties in a company. 9:15 And they did so, and made them all sit down. 9:16 Then he took the five loaves and the two fishes, and looking up
to heaven, he blessed them, and brake, and gave to the disciples to
set before the multitude. 9:17 And they did eat, and were all filled: and there was taken up of
fragments that remained to them twelve baskets. 9:18 And it came to pass, as he was alone praying, his disciples were
with him: and he asked them, saying, Whom say the people that I am? 9:19 They answering said, John the Baptist; but some say, Elias; and
others say, that one of the old prophets is risen again. 9:20 He said unto them, But whom say ye that I am? Peter answering
said, The Christ of God. 9:21 And he straitly charged them, and commanded them to tell no man
that thing; 9:22 Saying, The Son of man must suffer many things, and
be rejected of the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be slain,
and be raised the third day. 9:23 And he said to them all, If any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily, and follow me. 9:24 For whosoever will save his life shall lose it: but whosoever
will lose his life for my sake, the same shall save it. 9:25 For what is a man advantaged, if he gain the whole world, and
lose himself, or be cast away? 9:26 For whosoever shall be ashamed of
me and of my words, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he
shall come in his own glory, and in his Father's, and of the holy
angels. 9:27 But I tell you of a truth, there be some standing here, which
shall not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God. 9:28 And it came to pass about an eight days after these sayings, he
took Peter and John and James, and went up into a mountain to pray. 9:29 And as he prayed, the fashion of his countenance was altered, and
his raiment was white and glistering. 9:30 And, behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and
Elias: 9:31 Who appeared in glory, and spake of his decease which he
should accomplish at Jerusalem. 9:32 But Peter and they that were with him were heavy with sleep: and
when they were awake, they saw his glory, and the two men that stood
with him. 9:33 And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said unto
Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias: not
knowing what he said. 9:34 While he thus spake, there came a cloud, and overshadowed them:
and they feared as they entered into the cloud. 9:35 And there came a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my
beloved Son: hear him. 9:36 And when the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And they kept
it close, and told no man in those days any of those things which they
had seen. 9:37 And it came to pass, that on the next day, when they were come
down from the hill, much people met him. 9:38 And, behold, a man of the company cried out, saying, Master, I
beseech thee, look upon my son: for he is mine only child. 9:39 And, lo, a spirit taketh him, and he suddenly crieth out; and it
teareth him that he foameth again, and bruising him hardly departeth
from him. 9:40 And I besought thy disciples to cast him out; and they could not. 9:41 And Jesus answering said, O faithless and perverse generation,
how long shall I be with you, and suffer you? Bring thy son hither. 9:42 And as he was yet a coming, the devil threw him down, and tare
him. And Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the child, and
delivered him again to his father. 9:43 And they were all amazed at the mighty power of God. But while
they wondered every one at all things which Jesus did, he said unto
his disciples, 9:44 Let these sayings sink down into your ears: for
the Son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men. 9:45 But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them,
that they perceived it not: and they feared to ask him of that saying. 9:46 Then there arose a reasoning among them, which of them should be
greatest. 9:47 And Jesus, perceiving the thought of their heart, took a child,
and set him by him, 9:48 And said unto them, Whosoever shall receive
this child in my name receiveth me: and whosoever shall receive me
receiveth him that sent me: for he that is least among you all, the
same shall be great. 9:49 And John answered and said, Master, we saw one casting out devils
in thy name; and we forbad him, because he followeth not with us. 9:50 And Jesus said unto him, Forbid him not: for he that is not
against us is for us. 9:51 And it came to pass, when the time was come that he should be
received up, he stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem, 9:52 And
sent messengers before his face: and they went, and entered into a
village of the Samaritans, to make ready for him. 9:53 And they did not receive him, because his face was as though he
would go to Jerusalem. 9:54 And when his disciples James and John saw this, they said, Lord,
wilt thou that we command fire to come down from heaven, and consume
them, even as Elias did? 9:55 But he turned, and rebuked them, and
said, Ye know not what manner of spirit ye are of. 9:56 For the Son of man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to
save them. And they went to another village. 9:57 And it came to pass, that, as they went in the way, a certain man
said unto him, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou goest. 9:58 And Jesus said unto him, Foxes have holes, and birds of the air
have nests; but the Son of man hath not where to lay his head. 9:59 And he said unto another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, suffer me
first to go and bury my father. 9:60 Jesus said unto him, Let the dead bury their dead: but go thou
and preach the kingdom of God. 9:61 And another also said, Lord, I will follow thee; but let me first
go bid them farewell, which are at home at my house. 9:62 And Jesus said unto him, No man, having put his hand to the
plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God. 10:1 After these things the LORD appointed other seventy also, and
sent them two and two before his face into every city and place,
whither he himself would come. 10:2 Therefore said he unto them, The harvest truly is great, but the
labourers are few: pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he
would send forth labourers into his harvest. 10:3 Go your ways: behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. 10:4 Carry neither purse, nor scrip, nor shoes: and salute no man by
the way. 10:5 And into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
house. 10:6 And if the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it:
if not, it shall turn to you again. 10:7 And in the same house remain, eating and drinking such things as
they give: for the labourer is worthy of his hire. Go not from house
to house. 10:8 And into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat such
things as are set before you: 10:9 And heal the sick that are therein,
and say unto them, The kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. 10:10 But into whatsoever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go
your ways out into the streets of the same, and say, 10:11 Even the
very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us, we do wipe off against
you: notwithstanding be ye sure of this, that the kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you. 10:12 But I say unto you, that it shall be more tolerable in that day
for Sodom, than for that city. 10:13 Woe unto thee, Chorazin! woe unto thee, Bethsaida! for if the
mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been done in
you, they had a great while ago repented, sitting in sackcloth and
ashes. 10:14 But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the
judgment, than for you. 10:15 And thou, Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven, shalt be
thrust down to hell. 10:16 He that heareth you heareth me; and he that despiseth you
despiseth me; and he that despiseth me despiseth him that sent me. 10:17 And the seventy returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the
devils are subject unto us through thy name. 10:18 And he said unto them, I beheld Satan as lightning fall from
heaven. 10:19 Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and
scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by
any means hurt you. 10:20 Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are
subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written
in heaven. 10:21 In that hour Jesus rejoiced in spirit, and said, I thank thee, O
Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes: even so,
Father; for so it seemed good in thy sight. 10:22 All things are delivered to me of my Father: and no man knoweth
who the Son is, but the Father; and who the Father is, but the Son,
and he to whom the Son will reveal him. 10:23 And he turned him unto his disciples, and said privately,
Blessed are the eyes which see the things that ye see: 10:24 For I
tell you, that many prophets and kings have desired to see those
things which ye see, and have not seen them; and to hear those things
which ye hear, and have not heard them. 10:25 And, behold, a certain lawyer stood up, and tempted him, saying,
Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? 10:26 He said unto
him, What is written in the law? how readest thou? 10:27 And he
answering said, Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy
mind; and thy neighbour as thyself. 10:28 And he said unto him, Thou hast answered right: this do, and
thou shalt live. 10:29 But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is
my neighbour? 10:30 And Jesus answering said, A certain man went down
from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him
of his raiment, and wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. 10:31 And by chance there came down a certain priest that way: and
when he saw him, he passed by on the other side. 10:32 And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and looked
on him, and passed by on the other side. 10:33 But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was: and
when he saw him, he had compassion on him, 10:34 And went to him, and
bound up his wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own
beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him. 10:35 And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two pence, and
gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him; and
whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee. 10:36 Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbour unto him
that fell among the thieves? 10:37 And he said, He that shewed mercy
on him. Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise. 10:38 Now it came to pass, as they went, that he entered into a
certain village: and a certain woman named Martha received him into
her house. 10:39 And she had a sister called Mary, which also sat at Jesus' feet,
and heard his word. 10:40 But Martha was cumbered about much serving, and came to him, and
said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister hath left me to serve
alone? bid her therefore that she help me. 10:41 And Jesus answered and said unto her, Martha, Martha, thou art
careful and troubled about many things: 10:42 But one thing is
needful: and Mary hath chosen that good part, which shall not be taken
away from her. 11:1 And it came to pass, that, as he was praying in a certain place,
when he ceased, one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to
pray, as John also taught his disciples. 11:2 And he said unto them, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in
heaven, Hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done, as
in heaven, so in earth. 11:3 Give us day by day our daily bread. 11:4 And forgive us our sins; for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us. And lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from
evil. 11:5 And he said unto them, Which of you shall have a friend, and
shall go unto him at midnight, and say unto him, Friend, lend me three
loaves; 11:6 For a friend of mine in his journey is come to me, and I
have nothing to set before him? 11:7 And he from within shall answer
and say, Trouble me not: the door is now shut, and my children are
with me in bed; I cannot rise and give thee. 11:8 I say unto you, Though he will not rise and give him, because he
is his friend, yet because of his importunity he will rise and give
him as many as he needeth. 11:9 And I say unto you, Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. 11:10 For every one that asketh receiveth; and he that seeketh
findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened. 11:11 If a son shall ask bread of any of you that is a father, will he
give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a
serpent? 11:12 Or if he shall ask an egg, will he offer him a
scorpion? 11:13 If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts
unto your children: how much more shall your heavenly Father give the
Holy Spirit to them that ask him? 11:14 And he was casting out a
devil, and it was dumb. And it came to pass, when the devil was gone
out, the dumb spake; and the people wondered. 11:15 But some of them said, He casteth out devils through Beelzebub
the chief of the devils. 11:16 And others, tempting him, sought of him a sign from heaven. 11:17 But he, knowing their thoughts, said unto them, Every kingdom
divided against itself is brought to desolation; and a house divided
against a house falleth. 11:18 If Satan also be divided against himself, how shall his kingdom
stand? because ye say that I cast out devils through Beelzebub. 11:19 And if I by Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your sons cast
them out? therefore shall they be your judges. 11:20 But if I with the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the
kingdom of God is come upon you. 11:21 When a strong man armed keepeth his palace, his goods are in
peace: 11:22 But when a stronger than he shall come upon him, and
overcome him, he taketh from him all his armour wherein he trusted,
and divideth his spoils. 11:23 He that is not with me is against me: and he that gathereth not
with me scattereth. 11:24 When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh through
dry places, seeking rest; and finding none, he saith, I will return
unto my house whence I came out. 11:25 And when he cometh, he findeth it swept and garnished. 11:26 Then goeth he, and taketh to him seven other spirits more wicked
than himself; and they enter in, and dwell there: and the last state
of that man is worse than the first. 11:27 And it came to pass, as he spake these things, a certain woman
of the company lifted up her voice, and said unto him, Blessed is the
womb that bare thee, and the paps which thou hast sucked. 11:28 But he said, Yea rather, blessed are they that hear the word of
God, and keep it. 11:29 And when the people were gathered thick together, he began to
say, This is an evil generation: they seek a sign; and there shall no
sign be given it, but the sign of Jonas the prophet. 11:30 For as Jonas was a sign unto the Ninevites, so shall also the
Son of man be to this generation. 11:31 The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with the
men of this generation, and condemn them: for she came from the utmost
parts of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon; and, behold, a
greater than Solomon is here. 11:32 The men of Nineve shall rise up in the judgment with this
generation, and shall condemn it: for they repented at the preaching
of Jonas; and, behold, a greater than Jonas is here. 11:33 No man, when he hath lighted a candle, putteth it in a secret
place, neither under a bushel, but on a candlestick, that they which
come in may see the light. 11:34 The light of the body is the eye: therefore when thine eye is
single, thy whole body also is full of light; but when thine eye is
evil, thy body also is full of darkness. 11:35 Take heed therefore that the light which is in thee be not
darkness. 11:36 If thy whole body therefore be full of light, having no part
dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of
a candle doth give thee light. 11:37 And as he spake, a certain Pharisee besought him to dine with
him: and he went in, and sat down to meat. 11:38 And when the Pharisee saw it, he marvelled that he had not first
washed before dinner. 11:39 And the Lord said unto him, Now do ye Pharisees make clean the
outside of the cup and the platter; but your inward part is full of
ravening and wickedness. 11:40 Ye fools, did not he that made that which is without make that
which is within also? 11:41 But rather give alms of such things as ye
have; and, behold, all things are clean unto you. 11:42 But woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye tithe mint and rue and all
manner of herbs, and pass over judgment and the love of God: these
ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other undone. 11:43 Woe unto you, Pharisees! for ye love the uppermost seats in the
synagogues, and greetings in the markets. 11:44 Woe unto you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! for ye are as
graves which appear not, and the men that walk over them are not aware
of them. 11:45 Then answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him, Master,
thus saying thou reproachest us also. 11:46 And he said, Woe unto you also, ye lawyers! for ye lade men with
burdens grievous to be borne, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens
with one of your fingers. 11:47 Woe unto you! for ye build the sepulchres of the prophets, and
your fathers killed them. 11:48 Truly ye bear witness that ye allow the deeds of your fathers:
for they indeed killed them, and ye build their sepulchres. 11:49 Therefore also said the wisdom of God, I will send them prophets
and apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute: 11:50
That the blood of all the prophets, which was shed from the foundation
of the world, may be required of this generation; 11:51 From the blood
of Abel unto the blood of Zacharias which perished between the altar
and the temple: verily I say unto you, It shall be required of this
generation. 11:52 Woe unto you, lawyers! for ye have taken away the key of
knowledge: ye entered not in yourselves, and them that were entering
in ye hindered. 11:53 And as he said these things unto them, the scribes and the
Pharisees began to urge him vehemently, and to provoke him to speak of
many things: 11:54 Laying wait for him, and seeking to catch something
out of his mouth, that they might accuse him. 12:1 In the mean time, when there were gathered together an
innumerable multitude of people, insomuch that they trode one upon
another, he began to say unto his disciples first of all, Beware ye of
the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. 12:2 For there is nothing covered, that shall not be revealed; neither
hid, that shall not be known. 12:3 Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness shall be heard in
the light; and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets shall
be proclaimed upon the housetops. 12:4 And I say unto you my friends, Be not afraid of them that kill
the body, and after that have no more that they can do. 12:5 But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which after
he hath killed hath power to cast into hell; yea, I say unto you, Fear
him. 12:6 Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings, and not one of them
is forgotten before God? 12:7 But even the very hairs of your head
are all numbered. Fear not therefore: ye are of more value than many
sparrows. 12:8 Also I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him
shall the Son of man also confess before the angels of God: 12:9 But
he that denieth me before men shall be denied before the angels of
God. 12:10 And whosoever shall speak a word against the Son of man, it
shall be forgiven him: but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy
Ghost it shall not be forgiven. 12:11 And when they bring you unto the synagogues, and unto
magistrates, and powers, take ye no thought how or what thing ye shall
answer, or what ye shall say: 12:12 For the Holy Ghost shall teach you
in the same hour what ye ought to say. 12:13 And one of the company said unto him, Master, speak to my
brother, that he divide the inheritance with me. 12:14 And he said unto him, Man, who made me a judge or a divider over
you? 12:15 And he said unto them, Take heed, and beware of
covetousness: for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the
things which he possesseth. 12:16 And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a
certain rich man brought forth plentifully: 12:17 And he thought
within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have no room where
to bestow my fruits? 12:18 And he said, This will I do: I will pull
down my barns, and build greater; and there will I bestow all my
fruits and my goods. 12:19 And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up
for many years; take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. 12:20 But God said unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be
required of thee: then whose shall those things be, which thou hast
provided? 12:21 So is he that layeth up treasure for himself, and is
not rich toward God. 12:22 And he said unto his disciples, Therefore I say unto you, Take
no thought for your life, what ye shall eat; neither for the body,
what ye shall put on. 12:23 The life is more than meat, and the body is more than raiment. 12:24 Consider the ravens: for they neither sow nor reap; which
neither have storehouse nor barn; and God feedeth them: how much more
are ye better than the fowls? 12:25 And which of you with taking
thought can add to his stature one cubit? 12:26 If ye then be not
able to do that thing which is least, why take ye thought for the
rest? 12:27 Consider the lilies how they grow: they toil not, they
spin not; and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these. 12:28 If then God so clothe the grass, which is to day in the field,
and to morrow is cast into the oven; how much more will he clothe you,
O ye of little faith? 12:29 And seek not ye what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink, neither be ye of doubtful mind. 12:30 For all these things do the nations of the world seek after: and
your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things. 12:31 But rather seek ye the kingdom of God; and all these things
shall be added unto you. 12:32 Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to
give you the kingdom. 12:33 Sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which
wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not, where no
thief approacheth, neither moth corrupteth. 12:34 For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. 12:35 Let your loins be girded about, and your lights burning; 12:36
And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their lord, when he will
return from the wedding; that when he cometh and knocketh, they may
open unto him immediately. 12:37 Blessed are those servants, whom the lord when he cometh shall
find watching: verily I say unto you, that he shall gird himself, and
make them to sit down to meat, and will come forth and serve them. 12:38 And if he shall come in the second watch, or come in the third
watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants. 12:39 And this know, that if the goodman of the house had known what
hour the thief would come, he would have watched, and not have
suffered his house to be broken through. 12:40 Be ye therefore ready also: for the Son of man cometh at an hour
when ye think not. 12:41 Then Peter said unto him, Lord, speakest thou this parable unto
us, or even to all? 12:42 And the Lord said, Who then is that
faithful and wise steward, whom his lord shall make ruler over his
household, to give them their portion of meat in due season? 12:43
Blessed is that servant, whom his lord when he cometh shall find so
doing. 12:44 Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all
that he hath. 12:45 But and if that servant say in his heart, My lord delayeth his
coming; and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens, and to
eat and drink, and to be drunken; 12:46 The lord of that servant will
come in a day when he looketh not for him, and at an hour when he is
not aware, and will cut him in sunder, and will appoint him his
portion with the unbelievers. 12:47 And that servant, which knew his lord's will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many
stripes. 12:48 But he that knew not, and did commit things worthy of stripes,
shall be beaten with few stripes. For unto whomsoever much is given,
of him shall be much required: and to whom men have committed much, of
him they will ask the more. 12:49 I am come to send fire on the earth; and what will I, if it be
already kindled? 12:50 But I have a baptism to be baptized with; and
how am I straitened till it be accomplished! 12:51 Suppose ye that I
am come to give peace on earth? I tell you, Nay; but rather division:
12:52 For from henceforth there shall be five in one house divided,
three against two, and two against three. 12:53 The father shall be divided against the son, and the son against
the father; the mother against the daughter, and the daughter against
the mother; the mother in law against her daughter in law, and the
daughter in law against her mother in law. 12:54 And he said also to the people, When ye see a cloud rise out of
the west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it is. 12:55 And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat;
and it cometh to pass. 12:56 Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the
earth; but how is it that ye do not discern this time? 12:57 Yea, and
why even of yourselves judge ye not what is right? 12:58 When thou
goest with thine adversary to the magistrate, as thou art in the way,
give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him; lest he hale
thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer, and the
officer cast thee into prison. 12:59 I tell thee, thou shalt not depart thence, till thou hast paid
the very last mite. 13:1 There were present at that season some that told him of the
Galilaeans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices. 13:2 And Jesus answering said unto them, Suppose ye that these
Galilaeans were sinners above all the Galilaeans, because they
suffered such things? 13:3 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish. 13:4 Or those eighteen, upon whom the tower in Siloam fell, and slew
them, think ye that they were sinners above all men that dwelt in
Jerusalem? 13:5 I tell you, Nay: but, except ye repent, ye shall all
likewise perish. 13:6 He spake also this parable; A certain man had a fig tree planted
in his vineyard; and he came and sought fruit thereon, and found none. 13:7 Then said he unto the dresser of his vineyard, Behold, these
three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none: cut
it down; why cumbereth it the ground? 13:8 And he answering said unto
him, Lord, let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it, and
dung it: 13:9 And if it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that
thou shalt cut it down. 13:10 And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath. 13:11 And, behold, there was a woman which had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years, and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up
herself. 13:12 And when Jesus saw her, he called her to him, and said unto her,
Woman, thou art loosed from thine infirmity. 13:13 And he laid his hands on her: and immediately she was made
straight, and glorified God. 13:14 And the ruler of the synagogue answered with indignation,
because that Jesus had healed on the sabbath day, and said unto the
people, There are six days in which men ought to work: in them
therefore come and be healed, and not on the sabbath day. 13:15 The Lord then answered him, and said, Thou hypocrite, doth not
each one of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his ass from the stall,
and lead him away to watering? 13:16 And ought not this woman, being
a daughter of Abraham, whom Satan hath bound, lo, these eighteen
years, be loosed from this bond on the sabbath day? 13:17 And when he
had said these things, all his adversaries were ashamed: and all the
people rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him. 13:18 Then said he, Unto what is the kingdom of God like? and
whereunto shall I resemble it? 13:19 It is like a grain of mustard
seed, which a man took, and cast into his garden; and it grew, and
waxed a great tree; and the fowls of the air lodged in the branches of
it. 13:20 And again he said, Whereunto shall I liken the kingdom of God? 13:21 It is like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures
of meal, till the whole was leavened. 13:22 And he went through the cities and villages, teaching, and
journeying toward Jerusalem. 13:23 Then said one unto him, Lord, are there few that be saved? And
he said unto them, 13:24 Strive to enter in at the strait gate: for
many, I say unto you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able. 13:25 When once the master of the house is risen up, and hath shut to
the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and say unto
you, I know you not whence ye are: 13:26 Then shall ye begin to say,
We have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our
streets. 13:27 But he shall say, I tell you, I know you not whence ye are;
depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity. 13:28 There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when ye shall see
Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, and all the prophets, in the kingdom of
God, and you yourselves thrust out. 13:29 And they shall come from the east, and from the west, and from
the north, and from the south, and shall sit down in the kingdom of
God. 13:30 And, behold, there are last which shall be first, and there are
first which shall be last. 13:31 The same day there came certain of the Pharisees, saying unto
him, Get thee out, and depart hence: for Herod will kill thee. 13:32 And he said unto them, Go ye, and tell that fox, Behold, I cast
out devils, and I do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I
shall be perfected. 13:33 Nevertheless I must walk to day, and to morrow, and the day
following: for it cannot be that a prophet perish out of Jerusalem. 13:34 O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the prophets, and stonest
them that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gathered thy
children together, as a hen doth gather her brood under her wings, and
ye would not! 13:35 Behold, your house is left unto you desolate: and
verily I say unto you, Ye shall not see me, until the time come when
ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord. 14:1 And it came to pass, as he went into the house of one of the
chief Pharisees to eat bread on the sabbath day, that they watched
him. 14:2 And, behold, there was a certain man before him which had the
dropsy. 14:3 And Jesus answering spake unto the lawyers and Pharisees, saying,
Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath day? 14:4 And they held their
peace. And he took him, and healed him, and let him go; 14:5 And
answered them, saying, Which of you shall have an ass or an ox fallen
into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the sabbath day? 14:6 And they could not answer him again to these things. 14:7 And he put forth a parable to those which were bidden, when he
marked how they chose out the chief rooms; saying unto them. 14:8 When thou art bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the
highest room; lest a more honourable man than thou be bidden of him;
14:9 And he that bade thee and him come and say to thee, Give this man
place; and thou begin with shame to take the lowest room. 14:10 But when thou art bidden, go and sit down in the lowest room;
that when he that bade thee cometh, he may say unto thee, Friend, go
up higher: then shalt thou have worship in the presence of them that
sit at meat with thee. 14:11 For whosoever exalteth himself shall be abased; and he that
humbleth himself shall be exalted. 14:12 Then said he also to him that bade him, When thou makest a
dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren, neither
thy kinsmen, nor thy rich neighbours; lest they also bid thee again,
and a recompence be made thee. 14:13 But when thou makest a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame, the blind: 14:14 And thou shalt be blessed; for they cannot
recompense thee: for thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of
the just. 14:15 And when one of them that sat at meat with him heard these
things, he said unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the
kingdom of God.