*  I was
too late with them at the market yesterday, but nobody will know but what
they are just fresh out of the water, unless you go and tell them." * Butta una sardella per pigliar un luccio. "Not I; trust me for that; I'm not such a fool," replied Piedro,
laughing; "I leave that to Francisco. Do you know, I saw him the other
day miss selling a melon for his father by turning the bruised side to
the customer, who was just laying down the money for it, and who was a
raw servant-boy, moreover--one who would never have guessed there were
two sides to a melon, if he had not, as you say, father, been told of
it?" "Off with you to market. You are a droll chap," said his father, "and
will sell my fish cleverly, I'll be bound. As to the rest, let every man
take care of his own grapes. You understand me, Piedro?" "Perfectly," said the boy, who perceived that his father was indifferent
as to his honesty, provided he sold fish at the highest price possible. He proceeded to the market, and he offered his fish with assiduity to
every person whom he thought likely to buy it, especially to those upon
whom he thought he could impose. He positively asserted to all who
looked at his fish, that they were just fresh out of the water. Good
judges of men and fish knew that he said what was false, and passed him
by with neglect; but it was at last what he called GOOD LUCK to meet with
the very same young raw servant-boy who would have bought the bruised
melon from Francisco. He made up to him directly, crying, "Fish! Fine
fresh fish! fresh fish!" "Was it caught to-day?" said the boy. "Yes, this morning; not an hour ago," said Piedro, with the greatest
effrontery. The servant-boy was imposed upon; and being a foreigner, speaking the
Italian language but imperfectly, and not being expert at reckoning the
Italian money, he was no match for the cunning Piedro, who cheated him
not only as to the freshness, but as to the price of the commodity. Piedro received nearly half as much again for his fish as he ought to
have done. On his road homewards from Naples to the little village of Resina, where
his father lived, he overtook Francisco, who was leading his father's
ass. The ass was laden with large panniers, which were filled with the
stalks and leaves of cauliflowers, cabbages, broccoli, lettuces, etc.--
all the refuse of the Neapolitan kitchens, which are usually collected by
the gardeners' boys, and carried to the gardens round Naples, to be mixed
with other manure. "Well filled panniers, truly," said Piedro, as he overtook Francisco and
the ass. The panniers were indeed not only filled to the top, but piled
up with much skill and care, so that the load met over the animal's back. "It is not a very heavy load for the ass, though it looks so large," said
Francisco. "The poor fellow, however, shall have a little of this
water," added he, leading the ass to a pool by the roadside. "I was not thinking of the ass, boy; I was not thinking of any ass, but
of you, when I said, 'Well filled panniers, truly!' This is your
morning's work, I presume, and you'll make another journey to Naples to-
day, on the same errand, I warrant, before your father thinks you have
done enough?" "Not before MY FATHER thinks I have done enough, but before I think so
myself," replied Francisco. "I do enough to satisfy myself and my father, too," said Piedro, "without
slaving myself after your fashion. Look here," producing the money he
had received for the fish; "all this was had for asking. It is no bad
thing, you'll allow, to know how to ask for money properly." "I should be ashamed to beg, or borrow either," said Francisco. "Neither did I get what you see by begging, or borrowing either," said
Piedro, "but by using my wits; not as you did yesterday, when, like a
novice, you showed the bruised side of your melon, and so spoiled your
market by your wisdom." "Wisdom I think it still," said Francisco. "And your father?" asked Piedro. "And my father," said Francisco. "Mine is of a different way of thinking," said Piedro. "He always tells
me that the buyer has need of a hundred eyes, and if one can blind the
whole hundred, so much the better. You must know, I got off the fish to-
day that my father could not sell yesterday in the market--got it off for
fresh just out of the river--got twice as much as the market price for
it; and from whom, think you? Why, from the very booby that would have
bought the bruised melon for a sound one if you would have let him. You'll allow I'm no fool, Francisco, and that I'm in a fair way to grow
rich, if I go on as I have begun." "Stay," said Francisco; "you forgot that the booby you took in to-day
will not be so easily taken in to-morrow. He will buy no more fish from
you, because he will be afraid of your cheating him; but he will be ready
enough to buy fruit from me, because he will know I shall not cheat him--
so you'll have lost a customer, and I gained one." "With all my heart," said Piedro. "One customer does not make a market;
if he buys no more from me, what care I? there are people enough to buy
fish in Naples." "And do you mean to serve them all in the same manner?" asked Francisco. "If they will be only so good as to give me leave," said Piedro,
laughing, and repeating his father's proverb, "'Venture a small fish to
catch a large one.'" *  He had learned to think that to cheat in making
bargains was witty and clever. * see anted. "And you have never considered, then," said Francisco, "that all these
people will, one after another, find you out in time?" "Ay, in time; but it will be some time first. There are a great many of
them, enough to last me all the summer, if I lose a customer a day," said
Piedro. "And next summer," observed Francisco, "what will you do?" "Next summer is not come yet; there is time enough to think what I shall
do before next summer comes. Why, now, suppose the blockheads, after
they had been taken in and found it out, all joined against me, and would
buy none of our fish--what then? Are there no trades but that of a
fisherman? In Naples, are there not a hundred ways of making money for a
smart lad like me? as my father says. What do you think of turning
merchant, and selling sugar-plums and cakes to the children in their
market? Would they be hard to deal with, think you?" "I think not," said Francisco; "but I think the children would find out
in time if they were cheated, and would like it as little as the men." "I don't doubt them. Then IN TIME I could, you know, change my trade--
sell chips and sticks in the wood-market--hand about the lemonade to the
fine folks, or twenty other things. There are trades enough, boy." "Yes, for the honest dealer," said Francisco, "but for no other; for in
all of them you'll find, as MY father says, that a good character is the
best fortune to set up with. Change your trade ever so often, you'll be
found out for what you are at last." "And what am I, pray?" said Piedro, angrily. "The whole truth of the
matter is, Francisco, that you envy my good luck, and can't bear to hear
this money jingle in my hand. Ay, stroke the long ears of your ass, and
look as wise as you please. It's better to be lucky than wise, as MY
father says. Good morning to you. When I am found out for what I am, or
when the worst comes to the worst, I can drive a stupid ass, with his
panniers filled with rubbish, as well as you do now, HONEST FRANCISCO." "Not quite so well. Unless you were HONEST FRANCISCO, you would not fill
his panniers quite so readily.". This was certain, that Francisco was so well known for his honesty
amongst all the people at Naples with whom his father was acquainted,
that everyone was glad to deal with him; and as he never wronged anyone,
all were willing to serve him--at least, as much as they could without
loss to themselves:  so that after the market was over, his panniers were
regularly filled by the gardeners and others with whatever he wanted. His industry was constant, his gains small but certain, and he every day
had more and more reason to trust to his father's maxim--That honesty is
the best policy. The foreign servant lad, to whom Francisco had so honestly, or, as Piedro
said, so sillily, shown the bruised side of the melon, was an Englishman. He left his native country, of which he was extremely fond, to attend
upon his master, to whom he was still more attached. His master was in a
declining state of health, and this young lad waited on him a little more
to his mind than his other servants. We must, in consideration of his
zeal, fidelity and inexperience, pardon him for not being a good judge of
fish. Though he had simplicity enough to be easily cheated once, he had
too much sense to be twice made a dupe. The next time he met Piedro in
the market, he happened to be in company with several English gentlemen's
servants, and he pointed Piedro out to them all as an arrant knave. They
heard his cry of "Fresh fish! fresh fish! fine fresh fish!" with
incredulous smiles, and let him pass, but not without some expressions of
contempt, though uttered in English, he tolerably well understood; for
the tone of contempt is sufficiently expressive in all languages. He
lost more by not selling his fish to these people than he had gained the
day before by cheating the ENGLISH BOOBY. The market was well supplied,
and he could not get rid of his cargo. "Is not this truly provoking?" said Piedro, as he passed by Francisco,
who was selling fruit for his father. "Look, my basket is as heavy as
when I left home and look at 'em yourself, they really are fine fresh
fish to-day and yet, because that revengeful booby told how I took him in
yesterday, not one of yonder crowd would buy them; and all the time they
really are fresh to-day!" "So they are," said Franscisco, "but you said so yesterday, when they
were not; and he that was duped then, is not ready to believe you to-day. How does he know that you deserve it better?" "He might have looked at the fish," repeated Piedro; "they are fresh to-
day. I am sure he need not have been afraid." "Ay," said Francisco; "but as my father said to you once--the scalded dog
fears cold water." *

* Il cane scottato dell' acqua calda ha paura poi della fredda. Here their conversation was interrupted by the same English lad, who
smiled as he came up to Francisco, and taking up a fine pine-apple, he
said, in a mixture of bad Italian and English--"I need not look at the
other side of this; you will tell me if it is not as good as it looks. Name your price; I know you have but one, and that an honest one; and as
to the rest, I am able and willing to pay for what I buy; that is to say,
my master is, which comes to the same thing. I wish your fruit could
make him well, and it would be worth its weight in gold to me, at least. We must have some of your grapes for him." "Is he not well?" inquired Francisco. "We must, then, pick out the best
for him," at the same time singling out a tempting bunch. "I hope he
will like these; but if you could some day come as far as Resina (it is a
village but a few miles out of town, where we have our vineyard), you
could there choose for yourself, and pluck them fresh from the vines for
your poor master." "Bless you, my good boy; I should take you for an Englishman, by your way
of dealing. I'll come to your village. Only write me down the name; for
your Italian names slip through my head. I'll come to the vineyard if it
was ten miles off; and all the time we stay in Naples (may it not be so
long as I fear it will! ), with my master's leave, which he never refuses
me to anything that's proper, I'll deal with you for all our fruit, as
sure as my name's Arthur, and with none else, with my good will. I wish
all your countrymen would take after you in honesty, indeed I do,"
concluded the Englishman, looking full at Piedro, who took up his unsold
basket of fish, looking somewhat silly, and gloomily walked off. Arthur, the English servant, was as good as his word. He dealt
constantly with Francisco, and proved an excellent customer, buying from
him during the whole season as much fruit as his master wanted. His
master, who was an Englishman of distinction, was invited to take up his
residence, during his stay in Italy, at the Count de F.'s villa, which
was in the environs of Naples--an easy walk from Resina. Francisco had
the pleasure of seeing his father's vineyard often full of generous
visitors, and Arthur, who had circulated the anecdote of the bruised
melon, was, he said, "proud to think that some of this was his doing, and
that an Englishman never forgot a good turn, be it from a countryman or
foreigner." "My dear boy," said Francisco's father to him, whilst Arthur was in the
vineyard helping to tend the vines, "I am to thank you and your honesty,
it seems, for our having our hands so full of business this season. It
is fair you should have a share of our profits." "So I have, father, enough and enough, when I see you and mother going on
so well. What can I want more?" "Oh, my brave boy, we know you are a grateful, good son; but I have been
your age myself; you have companions, you have little expenses of your
own. Here; this vine, this fig-tree, and a melon a week next summer
shall be yours. With these make a fine figure amongst the little
Neapolitan merchants; and all I wish is that you may prosper as well, and
by the same honest means, in managing for yourself, as you have done
managing for me." "Thank you, father; and if I prosper at all, it shall be by those means,
and no other, or I should not be worthy to be called your son." Piedro the cunning did not make quite so successful a summer's work as
did Francisco the honest. No extraordinary events happened, no singular
instance of bad or good luck occurred; but he felt, as persons usually
do, the natural consequences of his own actions. He pursued his scheme
of imposing, as far as he could, upon every person he dealt with; and the
consequence was, that at last nobody would deal with him. "It is easy to outwit one person, but impossible to outwit all the
world," said a man * who knew the world at least as well as either Piedro
or his father. * The Duke de Rochefoucault.--"On peut etre puls fin qu'un autre, mais
pas plus fin que tous les autres." Piedro's father, amongst others, had reason to complain. He saw his own
customers fall off from him, and was told, whenever he went into the
market, that his son was such a cheat there was no dealing with him. One
day, when he was returning from the market in a very bad humour, in
consequence of these reproaches, and of his not having found customers
for his goods, he espied his SMART son Piedro at a little merchant's
fruit-board devouring a fine gourd with prodigious greediness. "Where,
glutton, do you find money to pay for these dainties?" exclaimed his
father, coming close up to him, with angry gestures. Piedro's mouth was
much too full to make an immediate reply, nor did his father wait for
any, but darting his hand into the youth's pocket, pulled forth a handful
of silver. "The money, father," said Piedro, "that I got for the fish yesterday, and
that I meant to give you to-day, before you went out." "Then I'll make you remember it against another time, sirrah!" said his
father. "I'll teach you to fill your stomach with my money. Am I to
lose my customers by your tricks, and then find you here eating my all? You are a rogue, and everybody has found you out to be a rogue; and the
worst of rogues I find you, who scruples not to cheat his own father." Saying these words, with great vehemence he seized hold of Piedro, and in
the very midst of the little fruit-market gave him a severe beating. This beating did the boy no good; it was vengeance not punishment. Piedro saw that his father was in a passion, and knew that he was beaten
because he was found out to be a rogue, rather than for being one. He
recollected perfectly that his father once said to him:  "Let everyone
take care of his own grapes." Indeed it was scarcely reasonable to expect that a boy who had been
educated to think that he might cheat every customer he could in the way
of trade, should be afterwards scrupulously honest in his conduct towards
the father whose proverbs encouraged his childhood in cunning. Piedro writhed with bodily pain as he left the market after his drubbing,
but his mind was not in the least amended. On the contrary, he was
hardened to the sense of shame by the loss of reputation. All the little
merchants were spectators of this scene, and heard his father's words:
"You ARE a rogue, and the worst of rogues, who scruples not to cheat his
own father." These words were long remembered, and long did Piedro feel their effects. He once flattered himself that, when his trade of selling fish failed
him, he could readily engage in some other; but he now found, to his
mortification, that what Francisco's father said proved true:  "In all
trades the best fortune to set up with is a good character." Not one of the little Neapolitan merchants would either enter into
partnership with him, give him credit, or even trade with him for ready
money. "If you would cheat your own father, to be sure you will cheat
us," was continually said to him by these prudent little people. Piedro was taunted and treated with contempt at home and abroad. His
father, when he found that his son's smartness was no longer useful in
making bargains, shoved him out of his way whenever he met him. All the
food or clothes that he had at home seemed to be given to him grudgingly,
and with such expressions as these:  "Take that; but it is too good for
you. You must eat this, now, instead of gourds and figs--and be thankful
you have even this." Piedro spent a whole winter very unhappily. He expected that all his old
tricks, and especially what his father had said of him in the market-
place, would be soon forgotten; but month passed after month, and still
these things were fresh in the memory of all who had known them. It is not easy to get rid of a bad character. A very great rogue * was
once heard to say, that he would, with all his heart, give ten thousand
pounds for a good character, because he knew that he could make twenty
thousand by it. * Chartres. Something like this was the sentiment of our cunning hero when he
experienced the evils of a bad reputation, and when he saw the numerous
advantages which Francisco's good character procured. Such had been
Piedro's wretched education, that even the hard lessons of experience
could not alter its pernicious effects. He was sorry his knavery had
been detected, but he still thought it clever to cheat, and was secretly
persuaded that, if he had cheated successfully, he should have been
happy. "But I know I am not happy now," said he to himself one morning,
as he sat alone disconsolate by the sea-shore, dressed in tattered
garments, weak and hungry, with an empty basket beside him. His fishing-
rod, which he held between his knees, bent over the dry sands instead of
into the water, for he was not thinking of what he was about; his arms
were folded, his head hung down, and his ragged hat was slouched over his
face. He was a melancholy spectacle. Francisco, as he was coming from his father's vineyard with a large dish
of purple and white grapes upon his head, and a basket of melons and figs
hanging upon his arm, chanced to see Piedro seated in this melancholy
posture. Touched with compassion, Francisco approached him softly; his
footsteps were not heard upon the sands, and Piedro did not perceive that
anyone was near him till he felt something cold touch his hand; he then
started, and, looking up, saw a bunch of grapes, which Francisco was
holding over his head. "Eat them:  you'll find them very good, I hope," said Francisco, with a
benevolent smile. "They are excellent--most excellent, and I am much obliged to you,
Francisco," said Piedro. "I was very hungry, and that's what I am now,
without anybody's caring anything about it. I am not the favourite I was
with my father, but I know it is all my own fault." "Well, but cheer up," said Francisco; "my father always says, 'One who
knows he has been in fault, and acknowledges it, will scarcely be in
fault again.' Yes, take as many figs as you will," continued he; and
held his basket closer to Piedro, who, as he saw, cast a hungry eye upon
one of the ripe figs. "But," said Piedro, after he had taken several, "shall not I get you into
a scrape by taking so many? Won't your father be apt to miss them?" "Do you think I would give them to you if they were not my own?" said
Francisco, with a sudden glance of indignation. "Well, don't be angry that I asked the question; it was only from fear of
getting you into disgrace that I asked it." "It would not be easy for anybody to do that, I hope," said Francisco,
rather proudly. "And to me less than anybody," replied Piedro, in an insinuating tone,
"_I,_ that am so much obliged to you!" "A bunch of grapes, and a few figs, are no mighty obligation," said
Francisco, smiling; "I wish I could do more for you. You seem, indeed,
to have been very unhappy of late. We never see you in the markets as we
used to do." "No; ever since my father beat me, and called me rogue before all the
children there, I have never been able to show my face without being
gibed at by one or t'other. If you would but take me along with you
amongst them, and only just SEEM my friend, for a day or two, or so, it
would quite set me up again; for they all like you." "I would rather BE than seem your friend, if I could," said Francisco. "Ay, to be sure; that would be still better," said Piedro, observing that
Francisco, as he uttered his last sentence, was separating the grapes and
other fruits into two equal divisions. "To be sure I would rather you
would BE than SEEM a friend to me; but I thought that was too much to ask
at first, though I have a notion, notwithstanding I have been so UNLUCKY
lately--I have a notion you would have no reason to repent of it. You
would find me no bad hand, if you were to try, and take me into
partnership." "Partnership!" interrupted Francisco, drawing back alarmed; "I had no
thoughts of that." "But won't you? can't you?" said Piedro, in a supplicating tone; "CAN'T
you have thoughts of it? You'd find me a very active partner." Franscisco still drew back, and kept his eyes fixed upon the ground. He
was embarrassed; for he pitied Piedro, and he scarcely knew how to point
out to him that something more is necessary in a partner in trade besides
activity, and that is honesty. "Can't you?" repeated Piedro, thinking that he hesitated from merely
mercenary motives. "You shall have what share of the profits you
please." "I was not thinking of the profits," said Francisco;  "but without
meaning to be ill-natured to you, Piedro, I must say that I cannot enter
into any partnership with you at present; but I will do what, perhaps,
you will like as well," said he, taking half the fruit out of his basket;
"you are heartily welcome to this; try and sell it in the children's
fruit market. I'll go on before you, and speak to those I am acquainted
with, and tell them you are going to set up a new character, and that you
hope to make it a good one." "Hey, shall I! Thank you for ever, dear Francisco," cried Piedro,
seizing his plentiful gift of fruit. "Say what you please for me." "But don't make me say anything that is not true," said Francisco,
pausing. "No, to be sure not," said Piedro; "I DO mean to give no room for
scandal. If I could get them to trust me as they do you, I should be
happy indeed." "That is what you may do, if you please," said Francisco. "Adieu, I wish
you well with all my heart; but I must leave you now, or I shall be too
late for the market." CHAPTER II. Chi va piano va sano, e anche lontano. Fair and softly goes far in a day. Piedro had now an opportunity of establishing a good character. When he
went into the market with his grapes and figs, he found that he was not
shunned or taunted as usual. All seemed disposed to believe in his
intended reformation, and to give him a fair trial. These favourable dispositions towards him were the consequence of
Francisco's benevolent representations. He told them that he thought
Piedro had suffered enough to cure him of his tricks, and that it would
be cruelty in them, because he might once have been in fault, to banish
him by their reproaches from amongst them, and thus to prevent him from
the means of gaining his livelihood honestly. Piedro made a good beginning, and gave what several of the younger
customers thought excellent bargains. His grapes and figs were quickly
sold, and with the money that he got for them he the next day purchased
from a fruit dealer a fresh supply; and thus he went on for some time,
conducting himself with scrupulous honesty, so that he acquired some
credit among his companions. They no longer watched him with suspicious
eyes. They trusted to his measures and weights, and they counted less
carefully the change which they received from him. The satisfaction he felt from this alteration in their manners was at
first delightful to Piedro; but in proportion to his credit, his
opportunities of defrauding increased; and these became temptations which
he had not the firmness to resist. His old manner of thinking recurred. "I make but a few shillings a day, and this is but slow work," said he to
himself. "What signifies my good character, if I make so little by it?" Light gains, and frequent, make a heavy purse, * was one of Francisco's
proverbs. But Piedro was in too great haste to get rich to take time
into his account. He set his invention to work, and he did not want for
ingenuity, to devise means of cheating without running the risk of
detection. He observed that the younger part of the community were
extremely fond of certain coloured sugar plums, and of burnt almonds. * Poco e spesso empie il l'orsetto. With the money he had earned by two months' trading in fruit he laid in a
large stock of what appeared to these little merchants a stock of almonds
and sugar-plums, and he painted in capital gold coloured letters upon his
board, "Sweetest, largest, most admirable sugar-plums of all colours ever
sold in Naples, to be had here; and in gratitude to his numerous
customers, Piedro adds to these, 'Burnt almonds gratis.'". This advertisement attracted the attention of all who could read; and
many who could not read heard it repeated with delight. Crowds of
children surrounded Piedro's board of promise, and they all went away the
first day amply satisfied. Each had a full measure of coloured sugar-
plums at the usual price, and along with these a burnt almond gratis. The burnt almond had such an effect upon the public judgment, that it was
universally allowed that the sugar-plums were, as the advertisement set
forth, the largest, sweetest, most admirable ever sold in Naples; though
all the time they were, in no respect, better than any other sugar-plums. It was generally reported that Piedro gave full measure--fuller than any
other board in the city. He measured the sugar-plums in a little cubical
tin box; and this, it was affirmed, he heaped up to the top, and pressed
down before he poured out the contents into the open hands of his
approving customers. This belief, and Piedro's popularity, continued
longer even than he had expected; and, as he thought his sugar-plums had
secured their reputation with the GENEROUS PUBLIC, he gradually neglected
to add burnt almonds gratis. One day a boy of about ten years old passed carelessly by, whistling as
he went along, and swinging a carpenter's rule in his hand. "Ha! what
have we here?" cried he, stopping to read what was written on Piedro's
board. "This promises rarely. Old as I am, and tall of my age, which
makes the matter worse, I am still as fond of sugar-plums as my little
sister, who is five years younger than I. Come, Signor, fill me quick,
for I'm in haste to taste them, two measures of the sweetest, largest,
most admirable sugar-plums in Naples--one measure for myself and one for
my little Rosetta." "You'll pay for yourself and your sister, then," said Piedro, "for no
credit is given here." "No credit do I ask," replied the lively boy; "when I told you I loved
sugar-plums, did I tell you I loved them, or even my sister, so well as
to run in debt for them? Here's for myself, and here's for my sister's
share," said he, laying down his money; "and now for the burnt almonds
gratis, my good fellow." "They are all out; I have been out of burnt almonds this great while,"
said Piedro. "Then why are they in your advertisement here?" said Carlo. "I have not had time to scratch them out of the board." "What! not when you have, by your own account, been out of them a great
while? I did not know it required so much time to blot out a few words--
let us try. "; and as he spoke, Carlo, for that was the name of Piedro's
new customer, pulled a bit of white chalk out of his pocket, and drew a
broad score across the line on the board which promised burnt almonds
gratis. "You are most impatient," said Piedro; "I shall have a fresh stock of
almonds to-morrow." "Why must the board tell a lie to-day?" "It would ruin me to alter it," said Piedro. "A lie may ruin you, but I could scarcely think the truth could." "You have no right to meddle with me or my board," said Piedro, put off
his guard, and out of his usual soft voice of civility, by this last
observation. "My character, and that of my board, are too firmly
established now for any chance customer like you to injure." "I never dreamed of injuring you or anyone else," said Carlo--"I wish,
moreover, you may not injure yourself. Do as you please with your board,
but give me my sugar-plums, for I have some right to meddle with those,
having paid for them." "Hold out your hand, then." "No, put them in here, if you please; put my sister's, at least, in here;
she likes to have them in this box:  I bought some for her in it
yesterday, and she'll think they'll taste the better out of the same box. But how is this? your measure does not fill my box nearly; you give us
very few sugar-plums for our money." "I give you full measure, as I give to everybody." "The measure should be an inch cube, I know," said Carlo; "that's what
all the little merchants have agreed to, you know." "True," said Piedro, "so it is." "And so it is, I must allow," said Carlo, measuring the outside of it
with the carpenter's rule which he held in his hand. "An inch every way;
and yet by my eye--and I have no bad one, being used to measuring
carpenter's work for my father--by my eye I should think this would have
held more sugar-plums." "The eye often deceives us;" said Piedro. "There's nothing like
measuring, you find." "There's nothing like measuring, I find, indeed," replied Carlo, as he
looked closely at the end of his rule, which, since he spoke last, he had
put into the cube to take its depth in the inside. "This is not as deep
by a quarter of an inch, Signor Piedro, measured within as it is measured
without." Piedro changed colour terribly, and seizing hold of the tin box,
endeavoured to wrest it from the youth who measured so accurately. Carlo
held his prize fast, and lifting it above his head, he ran into the midst
of the square where the little market was held, exclaiming, "A discovery! a discovery! that concerns all who love sugar-plums. A discovery! a
discovery that concerns all who have ever bought the sweetest, and most
admirable sugar-plums ever sold in Naples." The crowd gathered from all parts of the square as he spoke. "We have bought," and "We have bought of those sugar-plums," cried
several little voices at once, "if you mean Piedro's." "The same," continued Carlo--"he who, out of gratitude to his numerous
customers, gives, or promises to give, burnt almonds gratis." "Excellent they were!" cried several voices. "We all know Piedro well;
but what's your discovery?" "My discovery is," said Carlo, "that you, none of you, know Piedro. Look
you here; look at this box--this is his measure; it has a false bottom--
it holds only three-quarters as much as it ought to do; and his numerous
customers have all been cheated of one-quarter of every measure of the
admirable sugar-plums they have bought from him. 'Think twice of a good
bargain,' says the proverb." "So we have been finely duped, indeed," cried some of the bystanders,
looking at one another with a mortified air. "Full of courtesy, full of
craft!" *  "So this is the meaning of his burnt almonds gratis," cried
others; all joined in an uproar of indignation, except one, who, as he
stood behind the rest, expressed in his countenance silent surprise and
sorrow. * Chi et FA pi caress che non vole,
O ingannato t'ha, o inganuar et vole. "Is this Piedro a relation of yours?" said Carlo, going up to this silent
person. "I am sorry, if he be, that I have published his disgrace, for I
would not hurt YOU. You don't sell sugar-plums as he does, I'm sure; for
my little sister Rosetta has often bought from you. Can this Piedro be a
friend of yours?" "I wished to have been his friend; but I see I can't," said Francisco. "He is a neighbour of ours, and I pitied him; but since he is at his old
tricks again, there's an end of the matter. I have reason to be obliged
to you, for I was nearly taken in. He has behaved so well for some time
past, that I intended this very evening to have gone to him, and to have
told him that I was willing to do for him what he has long begged of me
to do--to enter into partnership with him." "Francisco! Francisco!--your measure, lend us your measure!" exclaimed a
number of little merchants crowding round him. "You have a measure for
sugar-plums; and we have all agreed to refer to that, and to see how much
we have been cheated before we go to break Piedro's bench and declare him
bankrupt, *--the punishment for all knaves." * This word comes from two Italian words, bunco rotto--broken bench. Bankers and merchants used formerly to count their money, and write their
bills of exchange upon benches in the streets; and when a merchant or
banker lost his credit, and was unable to pay his debts, his bench was
broken. They pressed on to Francisco's board, obtained his measure, found that it
held something more than a quarter above the quantity that could be
contained in Piedro's. The cries of the enraged populace were now most
clamorous. They hung the just and the unjust measures upon high poles;
and, forming themselves into a formidable phalanx, they proceeded towards
Piedro's well known yellow lettered board, exclaiming, as they went
along, "Common cause! common cause! The little Neapolitan merchants will
have no knaves amongst them! Break his bench! break his bench! He is a
bankrupt in honesty." Piedro saw the mob, heard the indignant clamour, and, terrified at the
approach of numbers, he fled with the utmost precipitation, having
scarcely time to pack up half his sugar-plums. There was a prodigious
number, more than would have filled many honest measures, scattered upon
the ground and trampled under foot by the crowd. Piedro's bench was
broken, and the public vengeance wreaked itself also upon his treacherous
painted board. It was, after being much disfigured by various
inscriptions expressive of the universal contempt for Piedro, hung up in
a conspicuous part of the market-place; and the false measure was
fastened like a cap upon one of its corners. Piedro could never more
show his face in this market, and all hopes of friendship--all hopes of
partnership with Francisco--were for ever at an end. If rogues would calculate, they would cease to be rogues; for they would
certainly discover that it is most for their interest to be honest--
setting aside the pleasure of being esteemed and beloved, of having a
safe conscience, with perfect freedom from all the various embarrassments
and terror to which knaves are subject. Is it not clear that our crafty
hero would have gained rather more by a partnership with Francisco, and
by a fair character, than he could possibly obtain by fraudulent dealing
in comfits? When the mob had dispersed, after satisfying themselves with executing
summary justice upon Piedro's bench and board, Francisco found a
carpenter's rule lying upon the ground near Piedro's broken bench, which
he recollected to have seen in the hands of Carlo. He examined it
carefully, and he found Carlo's name written upon it, and the name of the
street where he lived; and though it was considerably out of his way, he
set out immediately to restore the rule, which was a very handsome one,
to its rightful owner. After a hot walk through several streets, he
overtook Carlo, who had just reached the door of his own house. Carlo
was particularly obliged to him, he said, for restoring this rule to him,
as it was a present from the master of a vessel, who employed his father
to do carpenter's work for him. "One should not praise one's self, they
say," continued Carlo, "but I long so much to gain your good opinion,
that I must tell you the whole history of the rule you have restored. It
was given to me for having measured the work and made up the bill of a
whole pleasure-boat myself. You may guess I should have been sorry
enough to have lost it. Thank you for its being once more in my careless
hands, and tell me, I beg, whenever I can do you any service. By-the-by,
I can make up for you a fruit stall. I'll do it to-morrow, and it shall
be the admiration of the market. Is there anything else you could think
of for me?" "Why, yes," said Francisco; "since you are so good-natured, perhaps you'd
be kind enough to tell me the meaning of some of those lines and figures
that I see upon your rule. I have a great curiosity to know their use." "That I'll explain to you with pleasure, as far as I know them myself;
but when I'm at fault, my father, who is cleverer than I am, and
understands trigonometry, can help us out." "Trigonometry!" repeated Francisco, not a little alarmed at the high
sounding word; "that's what I certainly shall never understand." "Oh, never fear," replied Carlo, laughing. "I looked just as you do now-
-I felt just as you do now--all in a fright and a puzzle, when I first
heard of angles and sines, and cosines, and arcs and centres, and
complements and tangents." "Oh mercy! mercy!" interrupted Francisco, whilst Carlo laughed, with a
benevolent sense of superiority. "Why," said Carlo, "you'll find all these things are nothing when you are
used to them. But I cannot explain my rule to you here broiling in the
sun. Besides, it will not be the work of a day, I promise you; but come
and see us at your leisure hours, and we'll study it together. I have a
great notion we shall become friends; and, to begin, step in with me
now," said Carlo, "and eat a little macaroni with us. I know it is ready
by this time. Besides, you'll see my father, and he'll show you plenty
of rules and compasses, as you like such things; and then I'll go home
with you in the cool of the evening, and you shall show me your melons
and vines, and teach me, in time, something of gardening. Oh, I see we
must be good friends, just made for each other; so come in--no ceremony." Carlo was not mistaken in his predictions; he and Francisco became very
good friends, spent all their leisure hours together, either in Carlo's
workshop or in Francisco's vineyard, and they mutually improved each
other. Francisco, before he saw his friend's rule, knew but just enough
of arithmetic to calculate in his head the price of the fruit which he
sold in the market; but with Carlo's assistance, and the ambition to
understand the tables and figures upon the wonderful rule, he set to work
in earnest, and in due time, satisfied both himself and his master. "Who knows but these things that I am learning now may be of some use to
me before I die?" said Francisco, as he was sitting one morning with his
tutor, the carpenter. "To be sure it will," said the carpenter, putting down his compasses,
with which he was drawing a circle--"Arithmetic is a most useful, and I
was going to say necessary thing to be known by men in all stations; and
a little trigonometry does no harm. In short, my maxim is, that no
knowledge comes amiss; for a man's head is of as much use to him as his
hands; and even more so. "A word to the wise will always suffice." "Besides, to say nothing of making a fortune, is not there a great
pleasure in being something of a scholar, and being able to pass one's
time with one's book, and one's compasses and pencil? Safe companions
these for young and old. No one gets into mischief that has pleasant
things to think of and to do when alone; and I know, for my part, that
trigonometry is--"

Here the carpenter, just as he was going to pronounce a fresh panegyric
upon his favourite trigonometry, was interrupted by the sudden entrance
of his little daughter Rosetta, all in tears:  a very unusual spectacle,
for, taking the year round, she shed fewer tears than any child of her
age in Naples. "Why, my dear good humoured little Rosetta, what has happened? Why these
large tears?" said her brother Carlo, and he went up to her, and wiped
them from her cheeks. "And these that are going over the bridge of the
nose so fast? I must stop these tears, too," said Carlo. Rosetta, at this speech, burst out laughing, and said that she did not
know till then that she had any bridge on her nose. "And were these shells the cause of the tears?" said her brother, looking
at a heap of shells, which she held before her in her frock. "Yes, partly," said Rosetta. "It was partly my own fault, but not all. You know I went out to the carpenter's yard, near the arsenal, where all
the children are picking up chips and sticks so busily; and I was as busy
as any of them, because I wanted to fill my basket soon; and then I
thought I should sell my basketful directly in the little wood-market. As soon as I had filled my basket, and made up my faggot (which was not
done, brother, till I was almost baked by the sun, for I was forced to
wait by the carpenters for the bits of wood to make up my faggot)--I say,
when it was all ready, and my basket full, I left it altogether in the
yard." "That was not wise to leave it," said Carlo. "But I only left it for a few minutes, brother, and I could not think
anybody would be so dishonest as to take it whilst I was away. I only
just ran to tell a boy, who had picked up all these beautiful shells upon
the sea-shore, and who wanted to sell them, that I should be glad to buy
them from him, if he would only be so good as to keep them for me, for an
hour or so, till I had carried my wood to market, and till I had sold it,
and so had money to pay him for the shells." "Your heart was set mightily on these shells, Rosetta." "Yes; for I thought you and Francisco, brother, would like to have them
for your nice grotto that you are making at Resina. That was the reason
I was in such a hurry to get them. The boy who had them to sell was very
good-natured; he poured them into my lap, and said I had such an honest
face he would trust me, and that as he was in a great hurry, he could not
wait an hour whilst I sold my wood; but that he was sure I would pay him
in the evening, and he told me that he would call here this evening for
the money. But now what shall I do, Carlo? I shall have no money to
give him:  I must give back his shells, and that's a great pity." "But how happened it that you did not sell your wood?" "Oh, I forgot; did not I tell you that? When I went for my basket, do
you know it was empty, quite empty, not a chip left? Some dishonest
person had carried it all off. Had not I reason to cry now, Carlo?' "I'll go this minute into the wood-market, and see if I can find your
faggot. Won't that be better than crying?" said her brother. "Should
you know any one of your pieces of wood again if you were to see them?" "Yes, one of them, I am sure, I should know again," said Rosetta. "It
had a notch at one end of it, where one of the carpenters cut it off from
another piece of wood for me." "And is this piece of wood from which the carpenter cut it still to be
seen?" said Francisco. "Yes, it is in the yard; but I cannot bring it to you, for it is very
heavy." "We can go to it," said Francisco, "and I hope we shall recover your
basketful." Carlo and his friend went with Rosetta immediately to the yard, near the
arsenal, saw the notched piece of wood, and then proceeded to the little
wood-market, and searched every heap that lay before the little factors;
but no notched bit was to be found, and Rosetta declared that she did not
see one stick that looked at all like any of hers. On their part, her companions eagerly untied their faggots to show them
to her, and exclaimed, "That they were incapable of taking what did not
belong to them; that of all persons they should never have thought of
taking anything from the good natured little Rosetta, who was always
ready to give to others, and to help them in making up their loads." Despairing of discovering the thief, Francisco and Carlo left the market. As they were returning home, they were met by the English servant Arthur,
who asked Francisco where he had been, and where he was going. As soon as he heard of Rosetta's lost faggot, and of the bit of wood,
notched at one end, of which Rosetta drew the shape with a piece of
chalk, which her brother had lent her, Arthur exclaimed, "I have seen
such a bit of wood as this within this quarter of an hour; but I cannot
recollect where. Stay! this was at the baker's, I think, where I went
for some rolls for my master. It was lying beside his oven." To the baker's they all went as fast as possible, and they got there but
just in time. The baker had in his hand the bit of wood with which he
was that instant going to feed his oven. "Stop, good Mr. Baker!" cried Rosetta, who ran into the baker's shop
first; and as he heard "Stop! stop!" re-echoed by many voices, the baker
stopped; and turning to Francisco, Carlo and Arthur, begged, with a
countenance of some surprise, to know why they had desired him to stop. The case was easily explained, and the baker told them that he did not
buy any wood in the little market that morning; that this faggot he had
purchased between the hours of twelve and one from a lad about
Francisco's height, whom he met near the yard of the arsenal. "This is my bit of wood, I am sure; I know it by this notch," said
Rosetta. "Well," said the baker, "if you will stay here a few minutes, you will
probably see the lad who sold it to me. He desired to be paid in bread,
and my bread was not quite baked when he was here. I bid him call again
in an hour, and I fancy he will be pretty punctual, for he looked
desperately hungry." The baker had scarcely finished speaking when Francisco, who was standing
watching at the door, exclaimed, "Here comes Piedro! I hope he is not
the boy who sold you the wood, Mr. Baker?" "He is the boy, though," replied the baker, and Piedro, who now entered
the shop, started at the sight of Carlo and Francisco, whom he had never
seen since the day of disgrace in the fruit-market. "Your servant, Signor Piedro," said Carlo; "I have the honour to tell you
that this piece of wood, and all that you took out of the basket, which
you found in the yard of the arsenal, belongs to my sister." "Yes, indeed," cried Rosetta. Piedro being very certain that nobody saw him when he emptied Rosetta's
basket, and imagining that he was suspected only upon the bare assertion
of a child like Rosetta, who might be baffled and frightened out of her
story, boldly denied the charge, and defied any one to prove him guilty. "He has a right to be heard in his own defence," said Arthur, with the
cool justice of an Englishman; and he stopped the angry Carlo's arm, who
was going up to the culprit with all the Italian vehemence of oratory and
gesture. Arthur went on to say something in bad Italian about the
excellence of an English trial by jury, which Carlo was too much enraged
to hear, but to which Francisco paid attention, and turning to Piedro, he
asked him if he was willing to be judged by twelve of his equals? "With all my heart," said Piedro, still maintaining an unmoved
countenance, and they returned immediately to the little wood-market. On
their way, they had passed through the fruit-market, and crowds of those
who were well acquainted with Piedro's former transactions followed, to
hear the event of the present trial. Arthur could not, especially as he spoke wretched Italian, make the eager
little merchants understand the nature and advantages of an English trial
by jury. They preferred their own summary mode of proceeding. Francisco, in whose integrity they all had perfect confidence, was chosen
with unanimous shouts for the judge; but he declined the office, and
another was appointed. He was raised upon a bench, and the guilty but
insolent looking Piedro, and the ingenuous, modest Rosetta stood before
him. She made her complaint in a very artless manner; and Piedro, with
ingenuity, which in a better cause would have deserved admiration, spoke
volubly and craftily in his own defence. But all that he could say could
not alter facts. The judge compared the notched bit of wood found at the
baker's with a piece from which it was cut, which he went to see in the
yard of the arsenal. It was found to fit exactly. The judge then found
it impossible to restrain the loud indignation of all the spectators. The prisoner was sentenced never more to sell wood in the market; and the
moment sentence was pronounced, Piedro was hissed and hooted out of the
market-place. Thus a third time he deprived himself of the means of
earning his bread. We shall not dwell upon all his petty methods of cheating in the trades
he next attempted. He handed lemonade about in a part of Naples where he
was not known, but he lost his customers by putting too much water and
too little lemon into this beverage. He then took to the waters from the
sulphurous springs, and served them about to foreigners; but one day, as
he was trying to jostle a competitor from the coach door, he slipped his
foot, and broke his glasses. They had been borrowed from an old woman,
who hired out glasses to the boys who sold lemonade. Piedro knew that it
was the custom to pay, of course, for all that was broken; but this he
was not inclined to do. He had a few shillings in his pocket, and
thought that it would be very clever to defraud this poor woman of her
right, and to spend his shillings upon what he valued much more than he
did his good name--macaroni. The shillings were soon gone. We shall now for the present leave Piedro to his follies and his fate;
or, to speak more properly, to his follies and their inevitable
consequences. Francisco was all this time acquiring knowledge from his new friends,
without neglecting his own or his father's business. He contrived,
during the course of autumn and winter, to make himself a tolerable
arithmetician. Carlo's father could draw plans in architecture neatly;
and pleased with the eagerness Francisco showed to receive instruction,
he willingly put a pencil and compasses into his hand, and taught him all
he knew himself. Francisco had great perseverance, and, by repeated
trials, he at length succeeded in copying exactly all the plans which his
master lent him. His copies, in time, surpassed the originals, and Carlo
exclaimed, with astonishment:  "Why, Francisco, what an astonishing
GENIUS you have for drawing!--Absolutely you draw plans better than my
father!" "As to genius," said Francisco, honestly, "I have none. All that I have
done has been done by hard labour. I don't know how other people do
things; but I am sure that I never have been able to get anything done
well but by patience. Don't you remember, Carlo, how you and even
Rosetta laughed at me the first time your father put a pencil into my
awkward, clumsy hands?" "Because," said Carlo, laughing again at the recollection, "you held your
pencil so drolly; and when you were to cut it, you cut it just as if you
were using a pruning-knife to your vines; but now it is your turn to
laugh, for you surpass us all. And the times are changed since I set
about to explain this rule of mine to you." "Ay, that rule," said Francisco--"how much I owe to it! Some great
people, when they lose any of their fine things, cause the crier to
promise a reward of so much money to anyone who shall find and restore
their trinket. How richly have you and your father rewarded me for
returning this rule!" Francisco's modesty and gratitude, as they were perfectly sincere,
attached his friends to him most powerfully; but there was one person who
regretted our hero's frequent absences from his vineyard at Resina. Not
Francisco's father, for he was well satisfied his son never neglected his
business; and as to the hours spent in Naples, he had so much confidence
in Francisco that he felt no apprehensions of his getting into bad
company. When his son had once said to him, "I spend my time at such a
place, and in such and such a manner," he was as well convinced of its
being so as if he had watched and seen him every moment of the day. But
it was Arthur who complained of Francisco's absence. "I see, because I am an Englishman," said he, "you don't value my
friendship, and yet that is the very reason you ought to value it; no
friends so good as the English, be it spoken without offence to your
Italian friend, for whom you now continually leave me to dodge up and
down here in Resina, without a soul that I like to speak to, for you are
the only Italian I ever liked." "You shall like another, I promise you," said Francisco. "You must come
with me to Carlo's, and see how I spend my evenings; then complain of me,
if you can." It was the utmost stretch of Arthur's complaisance to pay this visit;
but, in spite of his national prejudices and habitual reserve of temper,
he was pleased with the reception he met with from the generous Carlo and
the playful Rosetta. They showed him Francisco's drawings with
enthusiastic eagerness; and Arthur, though no great judge of drawing, was
in astonishment, and frequently repeated, "I know a gentleman who visits
my master who would like these things. I wish I might have them to show
him." "Take them, then," said Carlo; "I wish all Naples could see them,
provided they might be liked half as well as I like them." Arthur carried off the drawings, and one day, when his master was better
than usual, and when he was at leisure, eating a dessert of Francisco's
grapes, he entered respectfully, with his little portfolio under his arm,
and begged permission to show his master a few drawings done by the
gardener's son, whose grapes he was eating. Though not quite so partial a judge as the enthusiastic Carlo, this
gentleman was both pleased and surprised at the sight of these drawings,
considering how short a time Francisco had applied himself to this art,
and what slight instructions he had received. Arthur was desired to
summon the young artist. Francisco's honest, open manner, joined to the
proofs he had given of his abilities, and the character Arthur gave him
for strict honesty, and constant kindness to his parents, interested Mr.
Lee, the name of this English gentleman, much in his favour. Mr. Lee was
at this time in treaty with an Italian painter, whom he wished to engage
to copy for him exactly some of the cornices, mouldings, tablets, and
antique ornaments which are to be seen amongst the ruins of the ancient
city of Herculaneum. *

* We must give those of our young English readers who may not be
acquainted with the ancient city of Herculaneum, some idea of it. None
can be ignorant that near Naples is the celebrated volcanic mountain of
Vesuvius;--that, from time to time, there happen violent eruptions from
this mountain; that is to say, flames and immense clouds of smoke issue
from different openings, mouths, or CRATERS, as they are called, but more
especially from the summit of the mountain, which is distinguished by the
name of THE crater. A rumbling, and afterwards a roaring noise is heard
within, and prodigious quantities of stones and minerals burnt into
masses (scoriae), are thrown out of the crater, sometimes to a great
distance. The hot ashes from Mount Vesuvius have often been seen upon
the roofs of the houses of Naples, from which it is six miles distant. Streams of lava run down the sides of the mountains during the time of an
eruption, destroying everything in their way, and overwhelm the houses
and vineyards which are in the neighbourhood. About 17OO years ago, during the reign of the Roman Emperor Titus, there
happened a terrible eruption of Mount Vesuvius; and a large city called
Herculaneum, which was situated at about four miles' distance from the
volcano, was overwhelmed by the streams of lava which poured into it,
filled up the streets, and quickly covered over the tops of the houses,
so that the whole was no more visible. It remained for many years
buried. The lava which covered it became in time fit for vegetation,
plants grew there, a new soil was formed, and a new town called Portici
was built over this place where Herculaneum formerly stood. The little
village of Resina is also situated near the spot. About fifty years ago,
in a poor man's garden at Resina, a hole in a well about thirty feet
below the surface of the earth was observed. Some persons had the
curiosity to enter into this hole, and, after creeping underground for
some time, they came to the foundations of houses. The peasants,
inhabitants of the village, who had probably never heard of Herculaneum,
were somewhat surprised at their discovery. **  About the same time, in a
pit in the town of Portici, a similar passage underground was discovered,
and, by orders of the King of Naples, workmen were employed to dig away
the earth, and clear the passage. They found, at length, the entrance
into the town, which, during the reign of Titus, was buried under lava. It was about eighty-eight Neapolitan palms (a palm contains near nine
inches) below the top of the pit. The workmen, as they cleared the
passages, marked their way with chalk when they came to any turning, lest
they should lose themselves. The streets branched out in many
directions, and, lying across them, the workmen often found large pieces
of timber, beams, and rafters; some broken in the fall, others entire. These beams and rafters are burned quite black like charcoal, except
those that were found in moist places, which have more the colour of
rotten wood, and which are like a soft paste, into which you might run
your hand. The walls of the houses slant, some one way, some another,
and some are upright. Several magnificent buildings of brick, faced with
marble of different colours, are partly seen, where the workmen have
cleared away the earth and lava with which they were encrusted. Columns
of red and white marble, and flights of steps, are seen in different
places; and out of the ruins of the palaces some very fine statues and
pictures have been dug. Foreigners who visit Naples are very curious to
see this subterraneous city, and are desirous to carry with them into
their own country some proofs of their having examined this wonderful
place. ** Philosophical Transactions, vol. ix. p. 440. CHAPTER III. Tutte le gran faciende si fanno di poca cosa. What great events from trivial causes spring. Signor Camillo, the artist employed by Mr. Lee to copy some of the
antique ornaments in Herculaneum, was a liberal minded man, perfectly
free from that mean jealousy which would repress the efforts of rising
genius. "Here is a lad scarcely fifteen, a poor gardener's son, who, with merely
the instructions he could obtain from a common carpenter, has learned to
draw these plans and elevations, which you see are tolerably neat. What
an advantage your instruction would be to him," said Mr. Lee, as he
introduced Francisco to Signor Camillo. "I am interested in this lad
from what I have learned of his good conduct. I hear he is strictly
honest, and one of the best of sons. Let us do something for him. If
you will give him some knowledge of your art, I will, as far as money can
recompense you for your loss of time, pay whatever you may think
reasonable for his instruction." Signor Camillo made no difficulties; he was pleased with his pupil's
appearance, and every day he liked him better and better. In the room
where they worked together there were some large books of drawings and
plates, which Francisco saw now and then opened by his master, and which
he had a great desire to look over; but when he was left in the room by
himself he never touched them, because he had not permission. Signor
Camillo, the first day he came into this room with his pupil, said to
him, "Here are many valuable books and drawings, young man. I trust,
from the character I have heard of you, that they will be perfectly safe
here." Some weeks after Francisco had been with the painter, they had occasion
to look for the front of a temple in one of these large books. "What! don't you know in which book to look for it, Francisco?" cried his
master, with some impatience. "Is it possible that you have been here so
long with these books, and that you cannot find the print I mean? Had
you half the taste I gave you credit for, you would have singled it out
from all the rest, and have it fixed in your memory." "But, signor, I never saw it," said Francisco, respectfully, "or,
perhaps, I should have preferred it." "That you never saw it, young man, is the very thing of which I complain. Is a taste for the arts to be learned, think you, by looking at the cover
of a book like this? Is it possible that you never thought of opening
it?" "Often and often," cried Francisco, "have I longed to open it; but I
thought it was forbidden me, and however great my curiosity in your
absence, I have never touched them. I hoped indeed, that the time would
come when you would have the goodness to show them to me." "And so the time is come, excellent young man," cried Camillo; "much as I
love taste, I love integrity more. I am now sure of your having the one,
and let me see whether you have, as I believe you have, the other. Sit
you down here beside me; and we will look over these books together." The attention with which his young pupil examined everything, and the
pleasure he unaffectedly expressed in seeing these excellent prints,
sufficiently convinced his judicious master that it was not from the want
of curiosity or taste that he had never opened these tempting volumes. His confidence in Francisco was much increased by this circumstance,
slight as it may appear. One day, Signor Camillo came behind Francisco, as he was drawing with
much intentness, and tapping him upon the shoulder, he said to him:  "Put
up your pencils and follow me, I can depend upon your integrity; I have
pledged myself for it. Bring your note-book with you, and follow me; I
will this day show you something that will entertain you at least as much
as my large book of prints. Follow me." Francisco followed, till they came to the pit near the entrance of
Herculaneum. "I have obtained leave for you to accompany me," said his
master, "and you know, I suppose, that this is not a permission granted
to everyone?" Paintings of great value, besides ornaments of gold and
silver, antique bracelets, rings, etc., are from time to time found
amongst these ruins, and therefore it is necessary that no person should
be admitted whose honesty cannot be depended upon. Thus, even
Francisco's talents could not have advanced him in the world, unless they
had been united to integrity. He was much delighted and astonished by
the new scene that was now opened to his view; and as, day after day, he
accompanied his master to this subterraneous city, he had leisure for
observation. He was employed, as soon as he had gratified his curiosity,
in drawing. There are niches in the walls in several places, from which
pictures have been dug, and these niches are often adorned with elegant
masques, figures and animals, which have been left by the ignorant or
careless workmen, and which are going fast to destruction. Signor
Camillo, who was copying these for his English employer, had a mind to
try his pupil's skill, and, pointing to a niche bordered with grotesque
figures, he desired him to try if he could make any hand of it. Francisco made several trials, and at last finished such an excellent
copy, that his enthusiastic and generous master, with warm encomiums,
carried it immediately to his patron, and he had the pleasure to receive
from Mr. Lee a purse containing five guineas, as a reward and
encouragement for his pupil. Francisco had no sooner received this money, than he hurried to his
father and mother's cottage. His mother, some months before this time,
had taken a small dairy farm; and her son had once heard her express a
wish that she was but rich enough to purchase a remarkably fine brindled
cow, which belonged to a farmer in the neighbourhood. "Here, my dear mother," cried Francisco, pouring the guineas into her
lap; "and here," continued he, emptying a bag which contained about as
much more, in small Italian coins, the profits of trade-money he had
fairly earned during the two years he sold fruit amongst the little
Neapolitan merchants; "this is all yours, dearest mother, and I hope it
will be enough to pay for the brindled cow. Nay, you must not refuse me-
-I have set my heart upon the cow being milked by you this very evening;
and I'll produce my best bunches of grapes, and my father, perhaps, will
give us a melon; for I've had no time for melons this season; and I'll
step to Naples and invite--may I, mother?--my good friends, dear Carlo
and your favourite little Rosetta, and my old drawing master, and my
friend Arthur, and we'll sup with you at your dairy." The happy mother thanked her son, and the father assured him that neither
melon nor pine-apple should be spared, to make a supper worthy of his
friends. The brindled cow was bought, and Arthur and Carlo and Rosetta most
joyfully accepted their invitation. The carpenter had unluckily appointed to settle a long account that day
with one of his employers, and he could not accompany his children. It
was a delicious evening; they left Naples just as the sea-breeze, after
the heats of the day, was most refreshingly felt. The walk to Resina,
the vineyard, the dairy, and most of all, the brindled cow, were praised
by Carlo and Rosetta, with all the Italian superlatives which signify,
"Most beautiful! most delightful! most charming!" Whilst the English
Arthur, with as warm a heart, was more temperate in his praise, declaring
that this was "the most like an English summer's evening of any he had
ever felt since he came to Italy:  and that, moreover, the cream was
almost as good as what he had been used to drink in Cheshire." The
company, who were all pleased with each other, and with the gardener's
good fruit, which he produced in great abundance, did not think of
separating till late. It was a bright moonlight night, and Carlo asked his friend if he would
walk with them part of the way to Naples. "Yes, all the way most
willingly," cried Francisco, "that I may have the pleasure of giving to
your father, with my own hands, this fine bunch of grapes, that I have
reserved for him out of my own share." "Add this fine pine-apple for my share, then," said his father, "and a
pleasant walk to you, my young friends." They proceeded gaily along, and when they reached Naples, as they passed
through the square where the little merchants held their market,
Francisco pointed to the spot where he found Carlo's rule. He never
missed an opportunity of showing his friends that he did not forget their
former kindness to him. "That rule," said he, "has been the cause of all
my present happiness, and I thank you for--"

"Oh, never mind thanking him now," interrupted Rosetta, "but look yonder,
and tell me what all those people are about." She pointed to a group of
men, women and children, who were assembled under a piazza, listening in
various attitudes of attention to a man, who was standing upon a flight
of steps speaking in a loud voice, and with much action, to the people
who surrounded him. Francisco, Carlo and Rosetta joined his audience. The moon shone full upon his countenance, which was very expressive and
which varied frequently according to the characters of the persons whose
history he was telling, according to all the changes of their fortune. This man was one of those who are called Improvisatori--persons who, in
Italian towns, go about reciting verses or telling stories, which they
are supposed to invent as they go on speaking. Some of these people speak
with great fluency, and collect crowds round them in the public streets. When an Improvisatore sees the attention of his audience fixed, and when
he comes to some very interesting part of his narrative, he dexterously
drops his hat upon the ground, and pauses till his auditors have paid
tribute to his eloquence. When he thinks the hat sufficiently full, he
takes it up again, and proceeds with his story. The hat was dropped just
as Francisco and his two friends came under the piazza. The orator had
finished one story, and was going to commence another. He fixed his eyes
upon Francisco, then glanced at Carlo and Rosetta, and after a moment's
consideration he began a story which bore some resemblance to one that
our young English readers may, perhaps, know by the name of "Cornaro, or
the Grateful Turk." Francisco was deeply interested in this narrative, and when the hat was
dropped, he eagerly threw in his contribution. At the end of the story,
when the speaker's voice stopped, there was a momentary silence, which
was broken by the orator himself, who exclaimed, as he took up the hat
which lay at his feet, "My friends, here is some mistake! this is not my
hat; it has been changed whilst I was taken up with my story. Pray,
gentlemen, find my hat amongst you; it was a remarkably good one, a
present from a nobleman for an epigram I made. I would not lose my hat
for twice its value. It has my name written withinside of it, Dominicho,
Improvisatore. Pray, gentlemen, examine your hats." Everybody present examined their hats, and showed them to Dominicho, but
his was not amongst them. No one had left the company; the piazza was
cleared, and searched in vain. "The hat has vanished by magic," said
Dominicho. "Yes, and by the same magic a statue moves," cried Carlo, pointing to a
figure standing in a niche, which had hitherto escaped observation. The
face was so much in the shade, that Carlo did not at first perceive that
the statue was Piedro. Piedro, when he saw himself discovered, burst
into a loud laugh, and throwing down Dominicho's hat, which he held in
his hand behind him, cried, "A pretty set of novices! Most excellent
players at hide-and-seek you would make." Whether Piedro really meant to have carried off the poor man's hat, or
whether he was, as he said, merely in jest, we leave it to those who know
his general character to decide. Carlo shook his head. "Still at your old tricks, Piedro," said he. "Remember the old proverb:  No fox so cunning but he comes to the
furrier's at last." *

* Tutte le volpi si trovano in pellicera. "I defy the furrier and you, too," replied Piedro, taking up his own
ragged hat. "I have no need to steal hats; I can afford to buy better
than you'll have upon your head. Francisco, a word with you, if you have
done crying at the pitiful story you have been listening to so
attentively." "And what would you say to me?" said Francisco, following him a few
steps. "Do not detain me long, because my friends will wait for me." "If they are friends, they can wait," said Piedro. "You need not be
ashamed of being seen in my company now, I can tell you; for I am, as I
always told you I should be, the richest man of the two." "Rich! you rich?" cried Francisco. "Well, then, it was impossible you
could mean to trick that poor man out of his good hat." "Impossible!" said Piedro. Francisco did not consider that those who
have habits of pilfering continue to practise them often, when the
poverty which first tempted them to dishonesty ceases. "Impossible! You
stare when I tell you I am rich; but the thing is so. Moreover, I am
well with my father at home. I have friends in Naples, and I call myself
Piedro the Lucky. Look you here," said he, producing an old gold coin. "This does not smell of fish, does it? My father is no longer a
fisherman, nor I either. Neither do I sell sugar-plums to children:  nor
do I slave myself in a vineyard, like some folks; but fortune, when I
least expected it, has stood my friend. I have many pieces of gold like
this. Digging in my father's garden, it was my luck to come to an old
Roman vessel full of gold. I have this day agreed for a house in Naples
for my father. We shall live, whilst we can afford it, like great folks,
you will see; and I shall enjoy the envy that will be felt by some of my
old friends, the little Neapolitan merchants, who will change their note
when they see my change of fortune. What say you to all this, Francisco
the Honest?" "That I wish you joy of your prosperity, and hope you may enjoy it long
and well." "Well, no doubt of that. Everyone who has it enjoys it WELL. He always
dances well to whom fortune pipes." *

* Assai ben balla a chi fortuna suona. "Yes, no longer pipe, no longer dance," replied Francisco; and here they
parted; for Piedro walked away abruptly, much mortified to perceive that
his prosperity did not excite much envy, or command any additional
respect from Francisco. "I would rather," said Francisco, when he returned to Carlo and Rosetta,
who waited for him under the portico, where he left them--"I would rather
have such good friends as you, Carlo and Arthur, and some more I could
name, and, besides that, have a clear conscience, and work honestly for
my bread, than be as lucky as Piedro. Do you know he has found a
treasure, he says, in his father's garden--a vase full of gold? He
showed me one of the gold pieces." "Much good may they do him. I hope he came honestly by them," said
Carlo; "but ever since the affair of the double measure, I suspect
double-dealing always from him. It is not our affair, however. Let him
make himself happy his way, and we ours. "He that would live in peace and rest,
      Must hear, and see, and say the best." *

* Odi, vedi, taci, se vuoi viver in pace. All Piedro's neighbours did not follow this peaceable maxim; for when he
and his father began to circulate the story of the treasure found in the
garden, the village of Resina did not give them implicit faith. People
nodded and whispered, and shrugged their shoulders; then crossed
themselves, and declared that they would not, for all the riches of
Naples, change places with either Piedro or his father. Regardless, or
pretending to be regardless, of these suspicions, Piedro and his father
persisted in their assertions. The fishing-nets were sold, and
everything in their cottage was disposed of; they left Resina, went to
live at Naples, and, after a few weeks, the matter began to be almost
forgotten in the village. The old gardener, Francisco's father, was one of those who endeavoured to
THINK THE BEST; and all that he said upon the subject was, that he would
not exchange Francisco the Honest for Piedro the Lucky; that one can't
judge of the day till one sees the evening as well as the morning. *

* La vita il fine,--e di loda la sera. "Compute the morn and evening of their day."--Pope. Not to leave our readers longer in suspense, we must inform them that the
peasants of Resina were right in their suspicions. Piedro had never
found any treasure in his father's garden, but he came by his gold in the
following manner:--

After he was banished from the little wood-market for stealing Rosetta's
basketful of wood, after he had cheated the poor woman, who let glasses
out to hire, out of the value of the glasses which he broke, and, in
short, after he had entirely lost his credit with all who knew him, he
roamed about the streets of Naples, reckless of what became of him. He found the truth of the proverb, "that credit lost is like a Venice
glass broken--it can't be mended again." The few shillings which he had
in his pocket supplied him with food for a few days. At last he was glad
to be employed by one of the peasants who came to Naples to load their
asses with manure out of the streets. They often follow very early in
the morning, or during the night-time, the trace of carriages that are
gone, or that are returning from the opera; and Piedro was one night at
this work, when the horses of a nobleman's carriage took fright at the
sudden blaze of some fireworks. The carriage was overturned near him; a
lady was taken out of it, and was hurried by her attendants into a shop,
where she stayed till her carriage was set to rights. She was too much
alarmed for the first ten minutes after her accident to think of
anything; but after some time, she perceived that she had lost a valuable
diamond cross, which she had worn that night at the opera. She was
uncertain where she had dropped it; the shop, the carriage, the street,
were searched for it in vain. Piedro saw it fall as the lady was lifted out of the carriage, seized
upon it, and carried it off. Ignorant as he was of the full value of
what he had stolen, he knew not how to satisfy himself as to this point,
without trusting someone with the secret. After some hesitation, he determined to apply to a Jew, who, as it was
whispered, was ready to buy everything that was offered to him for sale,
without making any TROUBLESOME inquiries. It was late; he waited till
the streets were cleared, and then knocked softly at the back door of the
Jew's house. The person who opened the door for Piedro was his own
father. Piedro started back; but his father had fast hold of him. "What brings you here?" said the father, in a low voice, a voice which
expressed fear and rage mixed. "Only to ask my way--my shortest way," stammered Piedro. "No equivocations! Tell me what brings you here at this time of the
night? I WILL know." Piedro, who felt himself in his father's grasp, and who knew that his
father would certainly search him, to find out what he had brought to
sell, thought it most prudent to produce the diamond cross. His father
could but just see its lustre by the light of a dim lamp, which hung over
their heads in the gloomy passage in which they stood. "You would have been duped, if you had gone to sell this to the Jew. It
is well it has fallen into my hands. How came you by it?" Piedro
answered that he had found it in the street. "Go your ways home, then,"
said his father; "it is safe with me. Concern yourself no more about
it." Piedro was not inclined thus to relinquish his booty, and he now thought
proper to vary in his account of the manner in which he found the cross. He now confessed that it had dropped from the dress of a lady, whose
carriage was overturned as she was coming home from the opera, and he
concluded by saying that, if his father took his prize from him without
giving him his share of the profits, he would go directly to the shop
where the lady stopped whilst her servants were raising the carriage, and
that he would give notice of his having found the cross. Piedro's father saw that his SMART son, though scarcely sixteen years of
age, was a match for him in villainy. He promised him that he should
have half of whatever the Jew would give for the diamonds, and Piedro
insisted upon being present at the transaction. We do not wish to lay open to our young readers scenes of iniquity. It
is sufficient to say that the Jew, who was a man old in all the arts of
villainy, contrived to cheat both his associates, and obtained the
diamond cross for less than half its value. The matter was managed so
that the transaction remained undiscovered. The lady who lost the cross,
after making fruitless inquiries, gave up the search, and Piedro and his
father rejoiced in the success of their manoeuvres. It is said, that "Ill gotten wealth is quickly spent"; * and so it proved
in this instance. Both father and son lived a riotous life as long as
their money lasted, and it did not last many months. What his bad
education began, bad company finished, and Piedro's mind was completely
ruined by the associates with whom he became connected during what he
called his PROSPERITY. When his money was at an end, these unprincipled
friends began to look cold upon him, and at last plainly told him--"If
you mean to LIVE WITH US, you must LIVE AS WE DO." They lived by
robbery. * Vien presto consumato l'ingiustamente acquistato. Piedro, though familiarized to the idea of fraud, was shocked at the
thought of becoming a robber by profession. How difficult it is to stop
in the career of vice! Whether Piedro had power to stop, or whether he
was hurried on by his associates, we shall, for the present, leave in
doubt. CHAPTER IV

We turn with pleasure from Piedro the Cunning to Francisco the Honest. Francisco continued the happy and useful course of his life. By his
unremitting perseverance, he improved himself rapidly under the
instructions of his master and friend, Signor Camillo; his friend, we
say, for the fair and open character of Francisco won, or rather earned,
the friendship of this benevolent artist. The English gentleman seemed
to take a pride in our hero's success and good conduct. He was not one
of those patrons who think that they have done enough when they have
given five guineas. His servant Arthur always considered every generous
action of his master's as his own, and was particularly pleased whenever
this generosity was directed towards Francisco. As for Carlo and the little Rosetta, they were the companions of all the
pleasant walks which Francisco used to take in the cool of the evening,
after he had been shut up all day at his work. And the old carpenter,
delighted with the gratitude of his pupil, frequently repeated--"that he
was proud to have given the first instructions to such a GENIUS; and that
he had always prophesied Francisco would be a GREAT man." "And a good man, papa," said Rosetta; "for though he has grown so great,
and though he goes into palaces now, to say nothing of that place
underground, where he has leave to go, yet, notwithstanding all this, he
never forgets my brother Carlo and you." "That's the way to have good friends," said the carpenter. "And I like
his way; he does more than he says. Facts are masculine, and words are
feminine." *

* I fatti sono maschii, le parole femmine. These goods friends seemed to make Francisco happier than Piedro could be
made by his stolen diamonds. One morning, Francisco was sent to finish a sketch of the front of an
ancient temple, amongst the ruins of Herculaneum. He had just reached
the pit, and the men were about to let him down with cords, in the usual
manner, when his attention was caught by the shrill sound of a scolding
woman's voice. He looked, and saw at some paces distant this female
fury, who stood guarding the windlass of a well, to which, with
threatening gestures and most voluble menaces, she forbade all access. The peasants--men, women and children, who had come with their pitchers
to draw water at this well--were held at bay by the enraged female. Not
one dared to be the first to advance; whilst she grasped with one hand
the handle of the windlass, and, with the other tanned muscular arm
extended, governed the populace, bidding them remember that she was
padrona, or mistress of the well. They retired, in hopes of finding a
more gentle padrona at some other well in the neighbourhood; and the
fury, when they were out of sight, divided the long black hair which hung
over her face, and, turning to one of the spectators, appealed to them in
a sober voice, and asked if she was not right in what she had done? "I,
that am padrona of the well," said she, addressing herself to Francisco,
who, with great attention, was contemplating her with the eye of a
painter--"I, that am padrona of the well, must in times of scarcity do
strict justice, and preserve for ourselves alone the water of our well. There is scarcely enough even for ourselves. I have been obliged to make
my husband lengthen the ropes every day for this week past. If things go
on at this rate, there will soon be not one drop of water left in my
well." "Nor in any of the wells of the neighbourhood," added one of the workmen,
who was standing by; and he mentioned several in which the water had
lately suddenly decreased; and a miller affirmed that his mill had
stopped for want of water. Francisco was struck by these remarks. They brought to his recollection
similar facts, which he had often heard his father mention in his
childhood, as having been observed previous to the last eruption of Mount
Vesuvius. *  He had also heard from his father, in his childhood, that it
is better to trust to prudence than to fortune; and therefore, though the
peasants and workmen, to whom he mentioned his fears, laughed, and said,
"That as the burning mountain had been favourable to them for so many
years, they would trust to it and St.  Januarius one day longer," yet
Francisco immediately gave up all thoughts of spending this day amidst
the ruins of Herculaneum. After having inquired sufficiently, after
having seen several wells, in which the water had evidently decreased,
and after having seen the mill-wheels that were standing still for want
of their usual supply, he hastened home to his father and mother,
reported what he had heard and seen, and begged of them to remove, and to
take what things of value they could to some distance from the dangerous
spot where they now resided. * Phil. Trans. vol. ix. Some of the inhabitants of Resina, whom he questioned, declared that they
had heard strange rumbling noises underground; and a peasant and his son,
who had been at work the preceding day in a vineyard, a little above the
village, related that they had seen a sudden puff of smoke come out of
the earth, close to them; and that they had, at the same time, heard a
noise like the going off of a pistol. *

* These facts are mentioned in Sir William Hamilton's account of an
eruption of Mount Vesuvius.--See Phil. Trans. 1795, first part. The villagers listened with large eyes and open ears to these relations;
yet such was their habitual attachment to the spot they lived upon, or
such the security in their own good fortune, that few of them would
believe that there could be any necessity for removing.--"We'll see what
will happen to-morrow; we shall be safe here one day longer," said they. Francisco's father and mother, more prudent than the generality of their
neighbours, went to the house of a relation, at some miles' distance from
Vesuvius, and carried with them all their effects. In the meantime, Francisco went to the villa where his English friends
resided. The villa was in a most dangerous situation, near Terre del
Greco--a town that stands at the foot of Mount Vesuvius. He related all
the facts that he had heard to Arthur, who, not having been, like the
inhabitants of Resina, familiarized to the idea of living in the vicinity
of a burning mountain, and habituated to trust in St. Januarius, was
sufficiently alarmed by Francisco's representations. He ran to his
master's apartment, and communicated all that he had just heard. The
Count de Flora and his lady, who were at this time in the house,
ridiculed the fears of Arthur, and could not be prevailed upon to remove
even as far as Naples. The lady was intent upon preparations for her
birthday, which was to be celebrated in a few days with great
magnificence at their villa; and she observed that it would be a pity to
return to town before that day, and they had everything arranged for the
festival. The prudent Englishman had not the gallantry to appear to be
convinced by these arguments, and he left the place of danger. He left
it not too soon, for the next morning exhibited a scene--a scene which we
shall not attempt to describe. We refer our young readers to the account of this dreadful eruption of
Mount Vesuvius, published by Sir W. Hamilton in the "Philosophical
Transactions." It is sufficient here to say that, in the space of about
five hours, the wretched inhabitants of Torre del Greco saw their town
utterly destroyed by the streams of burning lava which poured from the
mountain. The villa of Count de Flora, with some others, which were at a
little distance from the town, escaped; but they were absolutely
surrounded by the lava. The count and countess were obliged to fly from
their house with the utmost precipitation in the night-time; and they had
not time to remove any of their furniture, their plate, clothes, or
jewels. A few days after the eruption, the surface of the lava became so cool
that people could walk upon it, though several feet beneath the surface
it was still exceedingly hot. Numbers of those who had been forced from
their houses now returned to the ruins to try to save whatever they
could. But these unfortunate persons frequently found their houses had
been pillaged by robbers, who, in these moments of general confusion,
enrich themselves with the spoils of their fellow-creatures. "Has the count abandoned his villa? and is there no one to take care of
his plate and furniture? The house will certainly be ransacked before
morning," said the old carpenter to Francisco, who was at his house
giving him an account of their flight. Francisco immediately went to the
count's house in warn him of his danger. The first person he saw was
Arthur, who, with a face of terror, said to him, "Do you know what has
happened? It is all over with Resina!" "All over with Resina! What, has there been a fresh eruption? Has the
lava reached Resina?" "No; but it will inevitably be blown up. There," said Arthur, pointing
to a thin figure of an Italian, who stood pale and trembling, and looking
up to heaven as he crossed himself repeatedly. "There," said Arthur, "is
a man who has left a parcel of his cursed rockets and fireworks, with I
don't know how much gunpowder, in the count's house, from which we have
just fled. The wind blows that way. One spark of fire, and the whole is
blown up." Francisco waited not to hear more; but instantly, without explaining his
intentions to anyone, set out for the count's villa, and, with a bucket
of water in his hand, crossed the beds of lava with which the house was
encompassed; when, reaching the hall where the rockets and gunpowder were
left, he plunged them into the water, and returned with them in safety
over the lava, yet warm under his feet. What was the surprise and joy of the poor firework-maker when he saw
Francisco return from this dangerous expedition! He could scarcely
believe his eyes, when he saw the rockets and the gunpowder all safe. The count, who had given up the hopes of saving his palace, was in
admiration when he heard of this instance of intrepidity, which properly
saved not only his villa, but the whole village of Resina, from
destruction. These fireworks had been prepared for the celebration of
the countess' birthday, and were forgotten in the hurry of the night on
which the inhabitants fled from Torre del Greco. "Brave young man!" said the count to Francisco, "I thank you, and shall
not limit my gratitude to thanks. You tell me that there is danger of my
villa being pillaged by robbers. It is from this moment your interest,
as well as mine, to prevent their depredations; for (trust to my
liberality) a portion of all that is saved of mine shall be yours." "Bravo! bravissimo!" exclaimed one, who started from a recessed window in
the hall where all this passed. "Bravo! bravissimo!" --Francisco thought
he knew the voice and the countenance of this man, who exclaimed with so
much enthusiasm. He remembered to have seen him before, but when, or
where, he could not recollect. As soon as the count left the hall, the
stranger came up to Francisco. "Is it possible," said he, "that you
don't know me? It is scarcely a twelvemonth since I drew tears from your
eyes." "Tears from my eyes?" repeated Francisco, smiling; "I have shed but few
tears. I have had but few misfortunes in my life." The stranger
answered him by two extempore Italian lines, which conveyed nearly the
same idea that has been so well expressed by an English poet:--

     "To each their sufferings--all are men
         Condemn'd alike to groan;
      The feeling for another's woes,
         Th' unfeeling for his own." "I know you now perfectly well," cried Francisco; "you are the
Improvisatore who, one fine moonlight night last summer, told us the
story of Cornaro the Turk." "The same," said the Improvisatore; "the same, though in a better dress,
which I should not have thought would have made so much difference in
your eyes, though it makes all the difference between man and man in the
eyes of the stupid vulgar. My genius has broken through the clouds of
misfortune of late. A few happy impromptu verses I made on the Count de
Flora's fall from his horse attracted attention. The count patronizes
me. I am here now to learn the fate of an ode I have just composed for
his lady's birthday. My ode was to have been set to music, and to have
been performed at his villa near Torre del Greco, if these troubles had
not intervened. Now that the mountain is quiet again, people will return
to their senses. I expect to be munificently rewarded. But, perhaps, I
detain you. Go; I shall not forget to celebrate the heroic action you
have performed this day. I still amuse myself amongst the populace in my
tattered garb late in the evenings, and I shall sound your praises
through Naples in a poem I mean to recite on the late eruption of Mount
Vesuvius. Adieu." The Improvisatore was as good as his word. That evening, with more than
his usual enthusiasm, he recited his verses to a great crowd of people in
one of the public squares. Amongst the crowd were several to whom the
name of Francisco was well known, and by whom he was well beloved. These
were his young companions, who remembered him as a fruit-seller amongst
the little merchants. They rejoiced to hear his praises, and repeated
the lines with shouts of applause. "Let us pass. What is all this disturbance in the streets?" said a man,
pushing his way through the crowd. A lad who held by his arm stopped
suddenly on hearing the name of Francisco, which the people were
repeating with so much enthusiasm. "Ha! I have found at last a story that interests you more than that of
Cornaro the Turk," cried the Improvisatore, looking in the face of the
youth, who had stopped so suddenly. "You are the young man who, last
summer, had liked to have tricked me out of my new hat. Promise me you
won't touch it now," said he, throwing down the hat at his feet, "or you
hear not one word I have to say. Not one word of the heroic action
performed at the villa of the Count de Flora, near Torre del Greco, this
morning, by Signor Francisco." "SIGNOR Francisco!" repeated the lad with disdain. "Well, let us hear
what you have to tell of him," added he. "Your hat is very safe, I
promise you; I shall not touch it. What of SIGNOR Francisco?" "SIGNOR Francisco I may, without impropriety, call him," said the
Improvisatore, "for he is likely to become rich enough to command the
title from those who might not otherwise respect his merit." "Likely to become rich! how?" said the lad, whom our readers have
probably before this time discovered to be Piedro. "How, pray, is he
likely to become rich enough to be a signor?" "The Count de Flora has promised him a liberal portion of all the fine
furniture, plate and jewels that can be saved from his villa at Torre del
Greco. Francisco is gone down hither now with some of the count's
domestics to protect the valuable goods against those villainous
plunderers, who robbed their fellow-creatures of what even the flames of
Vesuvius would spare." "Come, we have had enough of this stuff," cried the man whose arm Piedro
held. "Come away," and he hurried forwards. This man was one of the villains against whom the honest orator expressed
such indignation. He was one of those with whom Piedro got acquainted
during the time that he was living extravagantly upon the money he gained
by the sale of the stolen diamond cross. That robbery was not
discovered; and his success, as he called it, hardened him in guilt. He
was both unwilling and unable to withdraw himself from the bad company
with whom his ill gotten wealth connected him. He did not consider that
bad company leads to the gallows. *

* La mala compagnia e quella che mena uomini a la forca. The universal confusion which followed the eruption of Mount Vesuvius was
to these villains a time of rejoicing. No sooner did Piedro's companion
hear of the rich furniture, plate, etc., which the imprudent orator had
described as belonging to the Count de Flora's villa, than he longed to
make himself master of the whole. "It is a pity," said Piedro, "that the count has sent Francisco, with his
servants down to guard it." "And who is this Francisco of whom you seem to stand in so much awe?" "A boy, a young lad only, of about my own age; but I know him to be
sturdily honest. The servants we might corrupt; but even the old proverb
of 'Angle with a silver hook,' * won't hold good with him." * Pescar col hamo d'argento. "And if he cannot be won by fair means, he must be conquered by foul,"
said the desperate villain; "but if we offer him rather more than the
count has already promised for his share of the booty, of course he will
consult at once his safety and his interest." "No," said Piedro; "that is not his nature. I know him from a child, and
we had better think of some other house for to-night's business." "None other; none but this," cried his companion, with an oath. "My mind
is determined upon this, and you must obey your leader:  recollect the
fate of him who failed me yesterday." The person to whom he alluded was one of the gang of robbers who had been
assassinated by his companions for hesitating to commit some crime
suggested by their leader. No tyranny is so dreadful as that which is
exercised by villains over their young accomplices, who become their
slaves. Piedro, who was of a cowardly nature, trembled at the
threatening countenance of his captain, and promised submission. In the course of the morning, inquiries were made secretly amongst the
count's servants; and the two men who were engaged to sit up at the villa
that night along with Francisco, were bribed to second the views of this
gang of thieves. It was agreed that about midnight the robbers should be
let into the house; that Francisco should be tied hand and foot, whilst
they carried off their booty. "He is a stubborn chap, though so young, I
understand," said the captain of the robbers to his men; "but we carry
poniards, and know how to use them. Piedro, you look pale. You don't
require to be reminded of what I said to you when we were alone just
now?" Piedro's voice failed, and some of his comrades observed that he was
young and new to the business. The captain, who, from being his
pretended friend during his wealthy days, had of late become his tyrant,
cast a stern look at Piedro, and bid him be sure to be at the old Jew's,
which was the place of meeting, in the dusk of the evening. After saying
this he departed. Piedro, when he was alone, tried to collect his thoughts--all his
thoughts were full of horror. "Where am I?" said he to himself; "what am
I about? Did I understand rightly what he said about poniards? Francisco; oh, Francisco! Excellent, kind, generous Francisco! Yes, I
recollect your look when you held the bunch of grapes to my lips, as I
sat by the sea-shore deserted by all the world; and now, what friends
have I.  Robbers and--"  The word MURDERERS he could not utter. He again
recollected what had been said about poniards, and the longer his mind
fixed upon the words, and the look that accompanied them, the more he was
shocked. He could not doubt but that it was the serious intention of his
accomplices to murder Francisco, if he should make any resistance. Piedro had at this moment no friend in the world to whom he could apply
for advice or assistance. His wretched father died some weeks before
this time, in a fit of intoxication. Piedro walked up and down the
street, scarcely capable of thinking, much less of coming to any rational
resolution. The hours passed away, the shadows of the houses lengthened under his
footsteps, the evening came on, and when it grew dusk, after hesitating
in great agony of mind for some time, his fear of the robbers' vengeance
prevailed over every other feeling, and he went at the appointed hour to
the place of meeting. The place of meeting was at the house of that Jew to whom he, several
months before, sold the diamond cross. That cross which he thought
himself so lucky to have stolen, and to have disposed of undetected, was,
in fact, the cause of his being in his present dreadful situation. It
was at the Jew's that he connected himself with this gang of robbers, to
whom he was now become an absolute slave. "Oh, that I dared to disobey!" said he to himself, with a deep sigh, as
he knocked softly at the back door of the Jew's house. The back door
opened into a narrow, unfrequented street, and some small rooms at this
side of the house were set apart for the reception of guests who desired
to have their business kept secret. These rooms were separated by a dark
passage from the rest of the house, and numbers of people came to the
shop in the front of the house, which looked into a creditable street,
without knowing anything more, from the ostensible appearance of the
shop, than that it was a kind of pawnbroker's, where old clothes, old
iron, and all sorts of refuse goods, might be disposed of conveniently. At the moment Piedro knocked at the back door, the front shop was full of
customers; and the Jew's boy, whose office it was to attend to these
signals, let Piedro in, told him that none of his comrades were yet come,
and left him in a room by himself. He was pale and trembling, and felt a cold dew spread over him. He had a
leaden image of Saint Januarius tied round his neck, which, in the midst
of his wickedness, he superstitiously preserved as a sort of charm, and
on this he kept his eyes stupidly fixed, as he sat alone in this gloomy
place. He listened from time to time, but he heard no noise at the side of the
house where he was. His accomplices did not arrive, and, in a sort of
impatient terror, the attendant upon an evil conscience, he flung open
the door of his cell, and groped his way through the passage which he
knew led to the public shop. He longed to hear some noise, and to mix
with the living. The Jew, when Piedro entered the shop, was bargaining
with a poor, thin-looking man about some gunpowder. "I don't deny that it has been wet," said the man, "but since it was in
the bucket of water, it has been carefully dried. I tell you the simple
truth, that so soon after the grand eruption of Mount Vesuvius, the
people of Naples will not relish fireworks. My poor little rockets, and
even my Catherine-wheels, will have no effect. I am glad to part with
all I have in this line of business. A few days ago I had fine things in
readiness for the Countess de Flora's birthday, which was to have been
celebrated at the count's villa." "Why do you fix your eyes on me, friend? What is your discourse to me?" said Piedro, who imagined that the man fixed his eyes upon him as he
mentioned the name of the count's villa. "I did not know that I fixed my eyes upon you; I was thinking of my
fireworks," said the poor man, simply. "But now that I do look at you
and hear your voice, I recollect having had the pleasure of seeing you
before." "When? where?" said Piedro. "A great while ago; no wonder you have forgotten me," said the man; "but
I can recall the night to your recollection. You were in the street with
me the night I let off that unlucky rocket, which frightened the horses,
and was the cause of overturning a lady's coach. Don't you remember the
circumstance?" "I have a confused recollection of some such thing," said Piedro, in
great embarrassment; and he looked suspiciously at this man, in doubt
whether he was cunning, and wanted to sound him, or whether he was so
simple as he appeared. "You did not, perhaps, hear, then," continued the man, "that there was a
great search made, after the overturn, for a fine diamond cross,
belonging to the lady in the carriage? That lady, though I did not know
it till lately, was the Countess de Flora." "I know nothing of the matter," interrupted Piedro, in great agitation. His confusion was so marked, that the firework-maker could not avoid
taking notice of it; and a silence of some moments ensued. The Jew, more
practised in dissimulation than Piedro, endeavoured to turn the man's
attention back to his rockets and his gunpowder--agreed to take the
gunpowder--paid for it in haste, and was, though apparently unconcerned,
eager to get rid of him. But this was not so easily done. The man's
curiosity was excited, and his suspicions of Piedro were increased every
moment by all the dark changes of his countenance. Piedro, overpowered
with the sense of guilt, surprised at the unexpected mention of the
diamond cross, and of the Count de Flora's villa, stood like one
convicted, and seemed fixed to the spot, without power of motion. "I want to look at the old cambric that you said you had--that would do
for making--that you could let me have cheap for artificial flowers,"
said the firework-maker to the Jew; and as he spoke, his eye from time to
time looked towards Piedro. Piedro felt for the leaden image of the saint, which he wore round his
neck. The string which held it cracked, and broke with the pull he gave
it. This slight circumstance affected his terrified and superstitious
mind more than all the rest. He imagined that at this moment his fate
was decided; that Saint Januarius deserted him, and that he was undone. He precipitately followed the firework-man the instant he left the shop,
and seizing hold of his arm, whispered, "I must speak to you." "Speak, then," said the man, astonished. "Not here; this way," said he, drawing him towards the dark passage:
"what I have to say must not be overheard. You are going to the Count de
Flora's, are not you?" "I am," said the man. He was going there to speak to the countess about
some artificial flowers; but Piedro thought he was going to speak to her
about the diamond cross. "You are going to give information against me? Nay, hear me, I confess
that I purloined that diamond cross; but I can do the count a great
service, upon condition that he pardons me. His villa is to be attacked
this night by four well armed men. They will set out five hours hence. I am compelled, under the threat of assassination, to accompany them; but
I shall do no more. I throw myself upon the count's mercy. Hasten to
him--we have no time to lose." The poor man, who heard this confession, escaped from Piedro the moment
he loosed his arm. With all possible expedition he ran to the count's
palace in Naples, and related to him all that had been said by Piedro. Some of the count's servants, on whom he could most depend, were at a
distant part of the city attending their mistress, but the English
gentleman offered the services of his man Arthur. Arthur no sooner heard
the business, and understood that Francisco was in danger, than he armed
himself without saying one word, saddled his English horse, and was ready
to depart before anyone else had finished their exclamations and
conjectures. "But we are not to set out yet," said the servant; "it is but four miles
to Torre del Greco; the sbirri (officers of justice) are summoned--they
are to go with us--we must wait for them." They waited, much against Arthur's inclination, a considerable time for
these sbirri. At length they set out, and just as they reached the
villa, the flash of the pistol was seen from one of the apartments in the
house. The robbers were there. This pistol was snapped by their captain
at poor Francisco, who had bravely asserted that he would, as long as he
had life, defend the property committed to his care. The pistol missed
fire, for it was charged with some of the damaged powder which the Jew
had bought that evening from the firework maker, and which he had sold as
excellent immediately afterwards to his favourite customers--the robbers
who met at his house. Arthur, as soon as he perceived the flash of the piece, pressed forward
through all the apartments, followed by the count's servants and the
officers of justice. At the sudden appearance of so many armed men, the
robbers stood dismayed. Arthur eagerly shook Francisco's hand,
congratulating him upon his safety, and did not perceive, till he had
given him several rough friendly shakes, that his arm was wounded, and
that he was pale with the loss of blood. "It is not much--only a slight wound," said Francisco; "one that I should
have escaped, if I had been upon my guard; but the sight of a face that I
little expected to see in such company took from me all presence of mind;
and one of the ruffians stabbed me here in the arm, whilst I stood in
stupid astonishment." "Oh! take me to prison! take me to prison--I am weary of life--I am a
wretch not fit to live!" cried Piedro, holding his hands to be tied by
the sbirri. The next morning Piedro was conveyed to prison; and as he passed through
the streets of Naples he was met by several of those who had known him
when he was a child. "Ay," said they, as he went by, "his father
encouraged him in cheating when he was BUT A CHILD; and see what he is
come to, now he is a man!" He was ordered to remain twelve months in
solitary confinement. His captain and his accomplices were sent to the
galleys, and the Jew was banished from Naples. And now, having got these villains out of the way, let us return to
honest Francisco. His wound was soon healed. Arthur was no bad surgeon,
for he let his patient get well as fast as he pleased; and Carlo and
Rosetta nursed him with so much kindness, that he was almost sorry to
find himself perfectly recovered. "Now that you are able to go out," said Francisco's father to him, "you
must come and look at my new house, my dear son." "Your new house, father?" "Yes, son, and a charming one it is, and a handsome piece of land near
it--all at a safe distance, too, from Mount Vesuvius; and can you guess
how I came by it?--it was given to me for having a good son." "Yes," cried Carlo; "the inhabitants of Resina, and several who had
property near Terre del Greco, and whose houses and lives were saved by
your intrepidity in carrying the materials for the fireworks and the
gunpowder out of this dangerous place, went in a body to the duke, and
requested that he would mention your name and these facts to the king,
who, amongst the grants he has made to the sufferers by the late eruption
of Mount Vesuvius, has been pleased to say that he gives this house and
garden to your father, because you have saved the property and lives of
many of his subjects." The value of a handsome portion of furniture, plate, etc., in the Count
de Flora's villa, was, according to the count's promise, given to him;
and this money he divided between his own family and that of the good
carpenter who first put a pencil into his hands. Arthur would not accept
of any present from him. To Mr. Lee, the English gentleman, he offered
one of his own drawings--a fruit-piece. "I like this very well," said Arthur, as he examined the drawing, "but I
should like this melon better if it was a little bruised. It is now
three years ago since I was going to buy that bruised melon from you; you
showed me your honest nature then, though you were but a boy; and I have
found you the same ever since. A good beginning makes a good ending--an
honest boy will make an honest man; and honesty is the best policy, as
you have proved to all who wanted the proof, I hope." "Yes," added Francisco's father, "I think it is pretty plain that Piedro
the Cunning has not managed quite so well as Francisco the Honest." TARLTON. Delightful task! to rear the tender thought,--
     To teach the young idea how to shoot,--
     To pour the fresh instruction o'er the mind,--
     To breathe th' enlivening spirit,--and to fix
     The generous purpose in the glowing breast. THOMSON. Young Hardy was educated by Mr. Freeman, a very excellent master, at one
of our rural Sunday schools. He was honest, obedient, active and good-
natured, hence he was esteemed by his master; and being beloved by all
his companions who were good, he did not desire to be loved by the bad;
nor was he at all vexed or ashamed when idle, mischievous or dishonest
boys attempted to plague or ridicule him. His friend Loveit, on the
contrary, wished to be universally liked, and his highest ambition was to
be thought the best natured boy in the school--and so he was. He usually
went by the name of POOR LOVEIT, and everybody pitied him when he got
into disgrace, which he frequently did, for though he had a good
disposition, he was led to do things which he knew to be wrong merely
because he could never have the courage to say "NO," because he was
afraid to offend the ill-natured, and could not bear to be laughed at by
fools. One fine autumn evening, all the boys were permitted to go out to play in
a pleasant green meadow near the school. Loveit and another boy, called
Tarlton, began to play a game of battledore and shuttlecock, and a large
party stood by to look on, for they were the best players at battledore
and shuttlecock in the school, and this was a trial of skill between
them. When they had got it up to three hundred and twenty, the game
became very interesting. The arms of the combatants tired that they
could scarcely wield the battledores. The shuttlecock began to waver in
the air; now it almost touched the ground, and now, to the astonishment
of the spectators, mounted again high over their heads:  yet the strokes
became feebler and feebler; and "Now, Loveit!" "Now, Tarlton!" resounded
on all sides. For another minute the victory was doubtful; but at length
the setting sun, shining full in Loveit's face, so dazzled his eyes that
he could no longer see the shuttlecock, and it fell at his feet. After the first shout for Tarlton's triumph was over, everybody
exclaimed, "Poor Loveit! he's the best natured fellow in the world! What
a pity that he did not stand with his back to the sun!" "Now, I dare you all to play another game with me," cried Tarlton,
vauntingly; and as he spoke, he tossed the shuttlecock up with all his
force--with so much force that it went over the hedge and dropped into a
lane, which went close beside the field. "Hey-day!" said Tarlton, "what
shall we do now?" The boys were strictly forbidden to go into the lane; and it was upon
their promise not to break this command, that they were allowed to play
in the adjoining field. No other shuttlecock was to be had and their play was stopped. They
stood on the top of the bank, peeping over the hedge. "I see it yonder,"
said Tarlton; "I wish somebody would get it. One could get over the gate
at the bottom of the field, and be back again in half a minute," added
he, looking at Loveit. "But you know we must not go into the lane," said
Loveit, hesitatingly. "Pugh!" said Tarlton, "why, now, what harm could
it do?" "I don't know," said Loveit, drumming upon his battledore; "but--"

"You don't know, man! why, then, what are you afraid of, I ask you?" Loveit coloured, went on drumming, and again, in a lower voice, said "HE
DIDN'T KNOW."