Lady. Who dares receiue it other,
As we shall make our Griefes and Clamor rore,
Vpon his Death? Macb. I am settled, and bend vp
Each corporall Agent to this terrible Feat. Away, and mock the time with fairest show,
False Face must hide what the false Heart doth know. Exeunt. Actus Secundus. Scena Prima. Enter Banquo, and Fleance, with a Torch before him. Banq. How goes the Night, Boy? Fleance. The Moone is downe: I haue not heard the
Clock

   Banq. And she goes downe at Twelue

   Fleance. I take't, 'tis later, Sir

   Banq. Hold, take my Sword:
There's Husbandry in Heauen,
Their Candles are all out: take thee that too. A heauie Summons lyes like Lead vpon me,
And yet I would not sleepe:
Mercifull Powers, restraine in me the cursed thoughts
That Nature giues way to in repose. Enter Macbeth, and a Seruant with a Torch. Giue me my Sword: who's there? Macb. A Friend

   Banq. What Sir, not yet at rest? the King's a bed. He hath beene in vnusuall Pleasure,
And sent forth great Largesse to your Offices. This Diamond he greetes your Wife withall,
By the name of most kind Hostesse,
And shut vp in measurelesse content

   Mac. Being vnprepar'd,
Our will became the seruant to defect,
Which else should free haue wrought

   Banq. All's well. I dreamt last Night of the three weyward Sisters:
To you they haue shew'd some truth

   Macb. I thinke not of them:
Yet when we can entreat an houre to serue,
We would spend it in some words vpon that Businesse,
If you would graunt the time

   Banq. At your kind'st leysure

   Macb. If you shall cleaue to my consent,
When 'tis, it shall make Honor for you

   Banq. So I lose none,
In seeking to augment it, but still keepe
My Bosome franchis'd, and Allegeance cleare,
I shall be counsail'd

   Macb. Good repose the while

   Banq. Thankes Sir: the like to you. Exit Banquo. Macb. Goe bid thy Mistresse, when my drinke is ready,
She strike vpon the Bell. Get thee to bed. Enter. Is this a Dagger, which I see before me,
The Handle toward my Hand? Come, let me clutch thee:
I haue thee not, and yet I see thee still. Art thou not fatall Vision, sensible
To feeling, as to sight? or art thou but
A Dagger of the Minde, a false Creation,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed Braine? I see thee yet, in forme as palpable,
As this which now I draw. Thou marshall'st me the way that I was going,
And such an Instrument I was to vse. Mine Eyes are made the fooles o'th' other Sences,
Or else worth all the rest: I see thee still;
And on thy Blade, and Dudgeon, Gouts of Blood,
Which was not so before. There's no such thing:
It is the bloody Businesse, which informes
Thus to mine Eyes. Now o're the one halfe World
Nature seemes dead, and wicked Dreames abuse
The Curtain'd sleepe: Witchcraft celebrates
Pale Heccats Offrings: and wither'd Murther,
Alarum'd by his Centinell, the Wolfe,
Whose howle's his Watch, thus with his stealthy pace,
With Tarquins rauishing sides, towards his designe
Moues like a Ghost. Thou sowre and firme-set Earth
Heare not my steps, which they may walke, for feare
Thy very stones prate of my where-about,
And take the present horror from the time,
Which now sutes with it. Whiles I threat, he liues:
Words to the heat of deedes too cold breath giues. A Bell rings. I goe, and it is done: the Bell inuites me. Heare it not, Duncan, for it is a Knell,
That summons thee to Heauen, or to Hell. Enter. Scena Secunda. Enter Lady. La. That which hath made the[m] drunk, hath made me bold:
What hath quench'd them, hath giuen me fire. Hearke, peace: it was the Owle that shriek'd,
The fatall Bell-man, which giues the stern'st good-night. He is about it, the Doores are open:
And the surfeted Groomes doe mock their charge
With Snores. I haue drugg'd their Possets,
That Death and Nature doe contend about them,
Whether they liue, or dye. Enter Macbeth. Macb. Who's there? what hoa? Lady. Alack, I am afraid they haue awak'd,
And 'tis not done: th' attempt, and not the deed,
Confounds vs: hearke: I lay'd their Daggers ready,
He could not misse 'em. Had he not resembled
My Father as he slept, I had don't. My Husband? Macb. I haue done the deed:
Didst thou not heare a noyse? Lady. I heard the Owle schreame, and the Crickets cry. Did not you speake? Macb. When? Lady. Now

   Macb. As I descended? Lady. I

   Macb. Hearke, who lyes i'th' second Chamber? Lady. Donalbaine

   Mac. This is a sorry sight

   Lady. A foolish thought, to say a sorry sight

   Macb. There's one did laugh in's sleepe,
And one cry'd Murther, that they did wake each other:
I stood, and heard them: But they did say their Prayers,
And addrest them againe to sleepe

   Lady. There are two lodg'd together

   Macb. One cry'd God blesse vs, and Amen the other,
As they had seene me with these Hangmans hands:
Listning their feare, I could not say Amen,
When they did say God blesse vs

   Lady. Consider it not so deepely

   Mac. But wherefore could not I pronounce Amen? I had most need of Blessing, and Amen stuck in my throat

   Lady. These deeds must not be thought
After these wayes: so, it will make vs mad

   Macb. Me thought I heard a voyce cry, Sleep no more:
Macbeth does murther Sleepe, the innocent Sleepe,
Sleepe that knits vp the rauel'd Sleeue of Care,
The death of each dayes Life, sore Labors Bath,
Balme of hurt Mindes, great Natures second Course,
Chiefe nourisher in Life's Feast

   Lady. What doe you meane? Macb. Still it cry'd, Sleepe no more to all the House:
Glamis hath murther'd Sleepe, and therefore Cawdor
Shall sleepe no more: Macbeth shall sleepe no more

   Lady. Who was it, that thus cry'd? why worthy Thane,
You doe vnbend your Noble strength, to thinke
So braine-sickly of things: Goe get some Water,
And wash this filthie Witnesse from your Hand. Why did you bring these Daggers from the place? They must lye there: goe carry them, and smeare
The sleepie Groomes with blood

   Macb. Ile goe no more:
I am afraid, to thinke what I haue done:
Looke on't againe, I dare not

   Lady. Infirme of purpose:
Giue me the Daggers: the sleeping, and the dead,
Are but as Pictures: 'tis the Eye of Childhood,
That feares a painted Deuill. If he doe bleed,
Ile guild the Faces of the Groomes withall,
For it must seeme their Guilt. Enter. Knocke within. Macb. Whence is that knocking? How is't with me, when euery noyse appalls me? What Hands are here? hah: they pluck out mine Eyes. Will all great Neptunes Ocean wash this blood
Cleane from my Hand? no: this my Hand will rather
The multitudinous Seas incarnardine,
Making the Greene one, Red. Enter Lady. Lady. My Hands are of your colour: but I shame
To weare a Heart so white. Knocke. I heare a knocking at the South entry:
Retyre we to our Chamber:
A little Water cleares vs of this deed. How easie is it then? your Constancie
Hath left you vnattended. Knocke. Hearke, more knocking. Get on your Night-Gowne, least occasion call vs,
And shew vs to be Watchers: be not lost
So poorely in your thoughts

   Macb. To know my deed,

Knocke. 'Twere best not know my selfe. Wake Duncan with thy knocking:
I would thou could'st. Exeunt. Scena Tertia. Enter a Porter. Knocking within. Porter. Here's a knocking indeede: if a man were
Porter of Hell Gate, hee should haue old turning the
Key. Knock. Knock, Knock, Knock. Who's there
i'th' name of Belzebub? Here's a Farmer, that hang'd
himselfe on th' expectation of Plentie: Come in time, haue
Napkins enow about you, here you'le sweat for't. Knock. Knock, knock. Who's there in th' other Deuils Name? Faith here's an Equiuocator, that could sweare in both
the Scales against eyther Scale, who committed Treason
enough for Gods sake, yet could not equiuocate to Heauen:
oh come in, Equiuocator. Knock. Knock, Knock, Knock. Who's there? 'Faith here's an English
Taylor come hither, for stealing out of a French Hose:
Come in Taylor, here you may rost your Goose. Knock. Knock, Knock. Neuer at quiet: What are you? but this
place is too cold for Hell. Ile Deuill-Porter it no further:
I had thought to haue let in some of all Professions, that
goe the Primrose way to th' euerlasting Bonfire. Knock. Anon, anon, I pray you remember the Porter. Enter Macduff, and Lenox. Macd. Was it so late, friend, ere you went to Bed,
That you doe lye so late? Port. Faith Sir, we were carowsing till the second Cock:
And Drinke, Sir, is a great prouoker of three things

   Macd. What three things does Drinke especially
prouoke? Port. Marry, Sir, Nose-painting, Sleepe, and Vrine. Lecherie, Sir, it prouokes, and vnprouokes: it prouokes
the desire, but it takes away the performance. Therefore
much Drinke may be said to be an Equiuocator with Lecherie:
it makes him, and it marres him; it sets him on,
and it takes him off; it perswades him, and dis-heartens
him; makes him stand too, and not stand too: in conclusion,
equiuocates him in a sleepe, and giuing him the Lye,
leaues him

   Macd. I beleeue, Drinke gaue thee the Lye last Night

   Port. That it did, Sir, i'the very Throat on me: but I
requited him for his Lye, and (I thinke) being too strong
for him, though he tooke vp my Legges sometime, yet I
made a Shift to cast him. Enter Macbeth. Macd. Is thy Master stirring? Our knocking ha's awak'd him: here he comes

   Lenox. Good morrow, Noble Sir

   Macb. Good morrow both

   Macd. Is the King stirring, worthy Thane? Macb. Not yet

   Macd. He did command me to call timely on him,
I haue almost slipt the houre

   Macb. Ile bring you to him

   Macd. I know this is a ioyfull trouble to you:
But yet 'tis one

   Macb. The labour we delight in, Physicks paine:
This is the Doore

   Macd. Ile make so bold to call, for 'tis my limitted
seruice. Exit Macduffe. Lenox. Goes the King hence to day? Macb. He does: he did appoint so

   Lenox. The Night ha's been vnruly:
Where we lay, our Chimneys were blowne downe,
And (as they say) lamentings heard i'th' Ayre;
Strange Schreemes of Death,
And Prophecying, with Accents terrible,
Of dyre Combustion, and confus'd Euents,
New hatch'd toth' wofull time. The obscure Bird clamor'd the liue-long Night. Some say, the Earth was Feuorous,
And did shake

   Macb. 'Twas a rough Night

   Lenox. My young remembrance cannot paralell
A fellow to it. Enter Macduff. Macd. O horror, horror, horror,
Tongue nor Heart cannot conceiue, nor name thee

   Macb. and Lenox. What's the matter? Macd. Confusion now hath made his Master-peece:
Most sacrilegious Murther hath broke ope
The Lords anoynted Temple, and stole thence
The Life o'th' Building

   Macb. What is't you say, the Life? Lenox. Meane you his Maiestie? Macd. Approch the Chamber, and destroy your sight
With a new Gorgon. Doe not bid me speake:
See, and then speake your selues: awake, awake,

Exeunt. Macbeth and Lenox. Ring the Alarum Bell: Murther, and Treason,
Banquo, and Donalbaine: Malcolme awake,
Shake off this Downey sleepe, Deaths counterfeit,
And looke on Death it selfe: vp, vp, and see
The great Doomes Image: Malcolme, Banquo,
As from your Graues rise vp, and walke like Sprights,
To countenance this horror. Ring the Bell. Bell rings. Enter Lady. Lady. What's the Businesse? That such a hideous Trumpet calls to parley
The sleepers of the House? speake, speake

   Macd. O gentle Lady,
'Tis not for you to heare what I can speake:
The repetition in a Womans eare,
Would murther as it fell. Enter Banquo. O Banquo, Banquo, Our Royall Master's murther'd

   Lady. Woe, alas:
What, in our House? Ban. Too cruell, any where. Deare Duff, I prythee contradict thy selfe,
And say, it is not so. Enter Macbeth, Lenox, and Rosse. Macb. Had I but dy'd an houre before this chance,
I had liu'd a blessed time: for from this instant,
There's nothing serious in Mortalitie:
All is but Toyes: Renowne and Grace is dead,
The Wine of Life is drawne, and the meere Lees
Is left this Vault, to brag of. Enter Malcolme and Donalbaine. Donal. What is amisse? Macb. You are, and doe not know't:
The Spring, the Head, the Fountaine of your Blood
Is stopt, the very Source of it is stopt

   Macd. Your Royall Father's murther'd

   Mal. Oh, by whom? Lenox. Those of his Chamber, as it seem'd, had don't:
Their Hands and Faces were all badg'd with blood,
So were their Daggers, which vnwip'd, we found
Vpon their Pillowes: they star'd, and were distracted,
No mans Life was to be trusted with them

   Macb. O, yet I doe repent me of my furie,
That I did kill them

   Macd. Wherefore did you so? Macb. Who can be wise, amaz'd, temp'rate, & furious,
Loyall, and Neutrall, in a moment? No man:
Th' expedition of my violent Loue
Out-run the pawser, Reason. Here lay Duncan,
His Siluer skinne, lac'd with His Golden Blood,
And his gash'd Stabs, look'd like a Breach in Nature,
For Ruines wastfull entrance: there the Murtherers,
Steep'd in the Colours of their Trade; their Daggers
Vnmannerly breech'd with gore: who could refraine,
That had a heart to loue; and in that heart,
Courage, to make's loue knowne? Lady. Helpe me hence, hoa

   Macd. Looke to the Lady

   Mal. Why doe we hold our tongues,
That most may clayme this argument for ours? Donal. What should be spoken here,
Where our Fate hid in an augure hole,
May rush, and seize vs? Let's away,
Our Teares are not yet brew'd

   Mal. Nor our strong Sorrow
Vpon the foot of Motion

   Banq. Looke to the Lady:
And when we haue our naked Frailties hid,
That suffer in exposure; let vs meet,
And question this most bloody piece of worke,
To know it further. Feares and scruples shake vs:
In the great Hand of God I stand, and thence,
Against the vndivulg'd pretence, I fight
Of Treasonous Mallice

   Macd. And so doe I

   All. So all

   Macb. Let's briefely put on manly readinesse,
And meet i'th' Hall together

   All. Well contented. Exeunt. Malc. What will you doe? Let's not consort with them:
To shew an vnfelt Sorrow, is an Office
Which the false man do's easie. Ile to England

   Don. To Ireland, I:
Our seperated fortune shall keepe vs both the safer:
Where we are, there's Daggers in mens smiles;
The neere in blood, the neerer bloody

   Malc. This murtherous Shaft that's shot,
Hath not yet lighted: and our safest way,
Is to auoid the ayme. Therefore to Horse,
And let vs not be daintie of leaue-taking,
But shift away: there's warrant in that Theft,
Which steales it selfe, when there's no mercie left. Exeunt. Scena Quarta. Enter Rosse, with an Old man. Old man. Threescore and ten I can remember well,
Within the Volume of which Time, I haue seene
Houres dreadfull, and things strange: but this sore Night
Hath trifled former knowings

   Rosse. Ha, good Father,
Thou seest the Heauens, as troubled with mans Act,
Threatens his bloody Stage: byth' Clock 'tis Day,
And yet darke Night strangles the trauailing Lampe:
Is't Nights predominance, or the Dayes shame,
That Darknesse does the face of Earth intombe,
When liuing Light should kisse it? Old man. 'Tis vnnaturall,
Euen like the deed that's done: On Tuesday last,
A Faulcon towring in her pride of place,
Was by a Mowsing Owle hawkt at, and kill'd

   Rosse. And Duncans Horses,
(A thing most strange, and certaine)
Beauteous, and swift, the Minions of their Race,
Turn'd wilde in nature, broke their stalls, flong out,
Contending 'gainst Obedience, as they would
Make Warre with Mankinde

   Old man. 'Tis said, they eate each other

   Rosse. They did so:
To th' amazement of mine eyes that look'd vpon't. Enter Macduffe. Heere comes the good Macduffe. How goes the world Sir, now? Macd. Why see you not? Ross. Is't known who did this more then bloody deed? Macd. Those that Macbeth hath slaine

   Ross. Alas the day,
What good could they pretend? Macd. They were subborned,
Malcolme, and Donalbaine the Kings two Sonnes
Are stolne away and fled, which puts vpon them
Suspition of the deed

   Rosse. 'Gainst Nature still,
Thriftlesse Ambition, that will rauen vp
Thine owne liues meanes: Then 'tis most like,
The Soueraignty will fall vpon Macbeth

   Macd. He is already nam'd, and gone to Scone
To be inuested

   Rosse. Where is Duncans body? Macd. Carried to Colmekill,
The Sacred Store-house of his Predecessors,
And Guardian of their Bones

   Rosse. Will you to Scone? Macd. No Cosin, Ile to Fife

   Rosse. Well, I will thither

   Macd. Well may you see things wel done there: Adieu
Least our old Robes sit easier then our new

   Rosse. Farewell, Father

   Old M. Gods benyson go with you, and with those
That would make good of bad, and Friends of Foes. Exeunt. omnes

Actus Tertius. Scena Prima. Enter Banquo. Banq. Thou hast it now, King, Cawdor, Glamis, all,
As the weyard Women promis'd, and I feare
Thou playd'st most fowly for't: yet it was saide
It should not stand in thy Posterity,
But that my selfe should be the Roote, and Father
Of many Kings. If there come truth from them,
As vpon thee Macbeth, their Speeches shine,
Why by the verities on thee made good,
May they not be my Oracles as well,
And set me vp in hope. But hush, no more. Senit sounded. Enter Macbeth as King, Lady Lenox, Rosse, Lords,
and
Attendants. Macb. Heere's our chiefe Guest

   La. If he had beene forgotten,
It had bene as a gap in our great Feast,
And all-thing vnbecomming

   Macb. To night we hold a solemne Supper sir,
And Ile request your presence

   Banq. Let your Highnesse
Command vpon me, to the which my duties
Are with a most indissoluble tye
For euer knit

   Macb. Ride you this afternoone? Ban. I, my good Lord

   Macb. We should haue else desir'd your good aduice
(Which still hath been both graue, and prosperous)
In this dayes Councell: but wee'le take to morrow. Is't farre you ride? Ban. As farre, my Lord, as will fill vp the time
'Twixt this, and Supper. Goe not my Horse the better,
I must become a borrower of the Night,
For a darke houre, or twaine

   Macb. Faile not our Feast

   Ban. My Lord, I will not

   Macb. We heare our bloody Cozens are bestow'd
In England, and in Ireland, not confessing
Their cruell Parricide, filling their hearers
With strange inuention. But of that to morrow,
When therewithall, we shall haue cause of State,
Crauing vs ioyntly. Hye you to Horse:
Adieu, till you returne at Night. Goes Fleance with you? Ban. I, my good Lord: our time does call vpon's

   Macb. I wish your Horses swift, and sure of foot:
And so I doe commend you to their backs. Farwell. Exit Banquo. Let euery man be master of his time,
Till seuen at Night, to make societie
The sweeter welcome:
We will keepe our selfe till Supper time alone:
While then, God be with you. Exeunt. Lords. Sirrha, a word with you: Attend those men
Our pleasure? Seruant. They are, my Lord, without the Pallace
Gate

   Macb. Bring them before vs.

Exit Seruant. To be thus, is nothing, but to be safely thus
Our feares in Banquo sticke deepe,
And in his Royaltie of Nature reignes that
Which would be fear'd. 'Tis much he dares,
And to that dauntlesse temper of his Minde,
He hath a Wisdome, that doth guide his Valour,
To act in safetie. There is none but he,
Whose being I doe feare: and vnder him,
My Genius is rebuk'd, as it is said
Mark Anthonies was by Caesar. He chid the Sisters,
When first they put the Name of King vpon me,
And bad them speake to him. Then Prophet-like,
They hayl'd him Father to a Line of Kings. Vpon my Head they plac'd a fruitlesse Crowne,
And put a barren Scepter in my Gripe,
Thence to be wrencht with an vnlineall Hand,
No Sonne of mine succeeding: if't be so,
For Banquo's Issue haue I fil'd my Minde,
For them, the gracious Duncan haue I murther'd,
Put Rancours in the Vessell of my Peace
Onely for them, and mine eternall Iewell
Giuen to the common Enemie of Man,
To make them Kings, the Seedes of Banquo Kings. Rather then so, come Fate into the Lyst,
And champion me to th' vtterance. Who's there? Enter Seruant, and two Murtherers. Now goe to the Doore, and stay there till we call. Exit Seruant. Was it not yesterday we spoke together? Murth. It was, so please your Highnesse

   Macb. Well then,
Now haue you consider'd of my speeches:
Know, that it was he, in the times past,
Which held you so vnder fortune,
Which you thought had been our innocent selfe. This I made good to you, in our last conference,
Past in probation with you:
How you were borne in hand, how crost:
The Instruments: who wrought with them:
And all things else, that might
To halfe a Soule, and to a Notion craz'd,
Say, Thus did Banquo

   1.Murth. You made it knowne to vs

   Macb. I did so:
And went further, which is now
Our point of second meeting. Doe you finde your patience so predominant,
In your nature, that you can let this goe? Are you so Gospell'd, to pray for this good man,
And for his Issue, whose heauie hand
Hath bow'd you to the Graue, and begger'd
Yours for euer? 1.Murth. We are men, my Liege

   Macb. I, in the Catalogue ye goe for men,
As Hounds, and Greyhounds, Mungrels, Spaniels, Curres,
Showghes, Water-Rugs, and Demy-Wolues are clipt
All by the Name of Dogges: the valued file
Distinguishes the swift, the slow, the subtle,
The House-keeper, the Hunter, euery one
According to the gift, which bounteous Nature
Hath in him clos'd: whereby he does receiue
Particular addition, from the Bill,
That writes them all alike: and so of men. Now, if you haue a station in the file,
Not i'th' worst ranke of Manhood, say't,
And I will put that Businesse in your Bosomes,
Whose execution takes your Enemie off,
Grapples you to the heart; and loue of vs,
Who weare our Health but sickly in his Life,
Which in his Death were perfect

   2.Murth. I am one, my Liege,
Whom the vile Blowes and Buffets of the World
Hath so incens'd, that I am recklesse what I doe,
To spight the World

   1.Murth. And I another,
So wearie with Disasters, tugg'd with Fortune,
That I would set my Life on any Chance,
To mend it, or be rid on't

   Macb. Both of you know Banquo was your Enemie

   Murth. True, my Lord

   Macb. So is he mine: and in such bloody distance,
That euery minute of his being, thrusts
Against my neer'st of Life: and though I could
With bare-fac'd power sweepe him from my sight,
And bid my will auouch it; yet I must not,
For certaine friends that are both his, and mine,
Whose loues I may not drop, but wayle his fall,
Who I my selfe struck downe: and thence it is,
That I to your assistance doe make loue,
Masking the Businesse from the common Eye,
For sundry weightie Reasons

   2.Murth. We shall, my Lord,
Performe what you command vs

   1.Murth. Though our Liues-
  Macb. Your Spirits shine through you. Within this houre, at most,
I will aduise you where to plant your selues,
Acquaint you with the perfect Spy o'th' time,
The moment on't, for't must be done to Night,
And something from the Pallace: alwayes thought,
That I require a clearenesse; and with him,
To leaue no Rubs nor Botches in the Worke:
  Fleans , his Sonne, that keepes him companie,
Whose absence is no lesse materiall to me,
Then is his Fathers, must embrace the fate
Of that darke houre: resolue your selues apart,
Ile come to you anon

   Murth. We are resolu'd, my Lord

   Macb. Ile call vpon you straight: abide within,
It is concluded: Banquo, thy Soules flight,
If it finde Heauen, must finde it out to Night. Exeunt. Scena Secunda. Enter Macbeths Lady, and a Seruant. Lady. Is Banquo gone from Court? Seruant. I, Madame, but returnes againe to Night

   Lady. Say to the King, I would attend his leysure,
For a few words

   Seruant. Madame, I will. Enter. Lady. Nought's had, all's spent. Where our desire is got without content:
'Tis safer, to be that which we destroy,
Then by destruction dwell in doubtfull ioy. Enter Macbeth. How now, my Lord, why doe you keepe alone? Of sorryest Fancies your Companions making,
Vsing those Thoughts, which should indeed haue dy'd
With them they thinke on: things without all remedie
Should be without regard: what's done, is done

   Macb. We haue scorch'd the Snake, not kill'd it:
Shee'le close, and be her selfe, whilest our poore Mallice
Remaines in danger of her former Tooth. But let the frame of things dis-ioynt,
Both the Worlds suffer,
Ere we will eate our Meale in feare, and sleepe
In the affliction of these terrible Dreames,
That shake vs Nightly: Better be with the dead,
Whom we, to gayne our peace, haue sent to peace,
Then on the torture of the Minde to lye
In restlesse extasie. Duncane is in his Graue:
After Lifes fitfull Feuer, he sleepes well,
Treason ha's done his worst: nor Steele, nor Poyson,
Mallice domestique, forraine Leuie, nothing,
Can touch him further

   Lady. Come on:
Gentle my Lord, sleeke o're your rugged Lookes,
Be bright and Iouiall among your Guests to Night

   Macb. So shall I Loue, and so I pray be you:
Let your remembrance apply to Banquo,
Present him Eminence, both with Eye and Tongue:
Vnsafe the while, that wee must laue
Our Honors in these flattering streames,
And make our Faces Vizards to our Hearts,
Disguising what they are

   Lady. You must leaue this

   Macb. O, full of Scorpions is my Minde, deare Wife:
Thou know'st, that Banquo and his Fleans liues

   Lady. But in them, Natures Coppie's not eterne

   Macb. There's comfort yet, they are assaileable,
Then be thou iocund: ere the Bat hath flowne
His Cloyster'd flight, ere to black Heccats summons
The shard-borne Beetle, with his drowsie hums,
Hath rung Nights yawning Peale,
There shall be done a deed of dreadfull note

   Lady. What's to be done? Macb. Be innocent of the knowledge, dearest Chuck,
Till thou applaud the deed: Come, seeling Night,
Skarfe vp the tender Eye of pittifull Day,
And with thy bloodie and inuisible Hand
Cancell and teare to pieces that great Bond,
Which keepes me pale. Light thickens,
And the Crow makes Wing toth' Rookie Wood:
Good things of Day begin to droope, and drowse,
Whiles Nights black Agents to their Prey's doe rowse. Thou maruell'st at my words: but hold thee still,
Things bad begun, make strong themselues by ill:
So prythee goe with me. Exeunt. Scena Tertia. Enter three Murtherers. 1. But who did bid thee ioyne with vs? 3. Macbeth

   2. He needes not our mistrust, since he deliuers
Our Offices, and what we haue to doe,
To the direction iust

   1. Then stand with vs:
The West yet glimmers with some streakes of Day. Now spurres the lated Traueller apace,
To gayne the timely Inne, and neere approches
The subiect of our Watch

   3. Hearke, I heare Horses

   Banquo within. Giue vs a Light there, hoa

   2. Then 'tis hee:
The rest, that are within the note of expectation,
Alreadie are i'th' Court

   1. His Horses goe about

   3. Almost a mile: but he does vsually,
So all men doe, from hence toth' Pallace Gate
Make it their Walke. Enter Banquo and Fleans, with a Torch. 2. A Light, a Light

   3. 'Tis hee

   1. Stand too't

   Ban. It will be Rayne to Night

   1. Let it come downe

   Ban. O, Trecherie! Flye good Fleans, flye, flye, flye,
Thou may'st reuenge. O Slaue! 3. Who did strike out the Light? 1. Was't not the way? 3. There's but one downe: the Sonne is fled

   2. We haue lost
Best halfe of our Affaire

   1. Well, let's away, and say how much is done. Exeunt. Scaena Quarta. Banquet prepar'd. Enter Macbeth, Lady, Rosse, Lenox, Lords, and
Attendants. Macb. You know your owne degrees, sit downe:
At first and last, the hearty welcome

   Lords. Thankes to your Maiesty

   Macb. Our selfe will mingle with Society,
And play the humble Host:
Our Hostesse keepes her State, but in best time
We will require her welcome

   La. Pronounce it for me Sir, to all our Friends,
For my heart speakes, they are welcome. Enter first Murtherer. Macb. See they encounter thee with their harts thanks
Both sides are euen: heere Ile sit i'th' mid'st,
Be large in mirth, anon wee'l drinke a Measure
The Table round. There's blood vpon thy face

   Mur. 'Tis Banquo's then

   Macb. 'Tis better thee without, then he within. Is he dispatch'd? Mur. My Lord his throat is cut, that I did for him

   Mac. Thou art the best o'th' Cut-throats,
Yet hee's good that did the like for Fleans:
If thou did'st it, thou art the Non-pareill

   Mur. Most Royall Sir
Fleans is scap'd

   Macb. Then comes my Fit againe:
I had else beene perfect;
Whole as the Marble, founded as the Rocke,
As broad, and generall, as the casing Ayre:
But now I am cabin'd, crib'd, confin'd, bound in
To sawcy doubts, and feares. But Banquo's safe? Mur. I, my good Lord: safe in a ditch he bides,
With twenty trenched gashes on his head;
The least a Death to Nature

   Macb. Thankes for that:
There the growne Serpent lyes, the worme that's fled
Hath Nature that in time will Venom breed,
No teeth for th' present. Get thee gone, to morrow
Wee'l heare our selues againe. Exit Murderer. Lady. My Royall Lord,
You do not giue the Cheere, the Feast is sold
That is not often vouch'd, while 'tis a making:
'Tis giuen, with welcome: to feede were best at home:
From thence, the sawce to meate is Ceremony,
Meeting were bare without it. Enter the Ghost of Banquo, and sits in Macbeths place. Macb. Sweet Remembrancer:
Now good digestion waite on Appetite,
And health on both

   Lenox. May't please your Highnesse sit

   Macb. Here had we now our Countries Honor, roof'd,
Were the grac'd person of our Banquo present:
Who, may I rather challenge for vnkindnesse,
Then pitty for Mischance

   Rosse. His absence (Sir)
Layes blame vpon his promise. Pleas't your Highnesse
To grace vs with your Royall Company? Macb. The Table's full

   Lenox. Heere is a place reseru'd Sir

   Macb. Where? Lenox. Heere my good Lord. What is't that moues your Highnesse? Macb. Which of you haue done this? Lords. What, my good Lord? Macb. Thou canst not say I did it: neuer shake
Thy goary lockes at me

   Rosse. Gentlemen rise, his Highnesse is not well

   Lady. Sit worthy Friends: my Lord is often thus,
And hath beene from his youth. Pray you keepe Seat,
The fit is momentary, vpon a thought
He will againe be well. If much you note him
You shall offend him, and extend his Passion,
Feed, and regard him not. Are you a man? Macb. I, and a bold one, that dare looke on that
Which might appall the Diuell

   La. O proper stuffe:
This is the very painting of your feare:
This is the Ayre-drawne-Dagger which you said
Led you to Duncan. O, these flawes and starts
(Impostors to true feare) would well become
A womans story, at a Winters fire
Authoriz'd by her Grandam: shame it selfe,
Why do you make such faces? When all's done
You looke but on a stoole

   Macb. Prythee see there:
Behold, looke, loe, how say you:
Why what care I, if thou canst nod, speake too. If Charnell houses, and our Graues must send
Those that we bury, backe; our Monuments
Shall be the Mawes of Kytes

   La. What? quite vnmann'd in folly

   Macb. If I stand heere, I saw him

   La. Fie for shame

   Macb. Blood hath bene shed ere now, i'th' olden time
Ere humane Statute purg'd the gentle Weale:
I, and since too, Murthers haue bene perform'd
Too terrible for the eare. The times has bene,
That when the Braines were out, the man would dye,
And there an end: But now they rise againe
With twenty mortall murthers on their crownes,
And push vs from our stooles. This is more strange
Then such a murther is

   La. My worthy Lord
Your Noble Friends do lacke you

   Macb. I do forget:
Do not muse at me my most worthy Friends,
I haue a strange infirmity, which is nothing
To those that know me. Come, loue and health to all,
Then Ile sit downe: Giue me some Wine, fill full:
Enter Ghost. I drinke to th' generall ioy o'th' whole Table,
And to our deere Friend Banquo, whom we misse:
Would he were heere: to all, and him we thirst,
And all to all

   Lords. Our duties, and the pledge

   Mac. Auant, & quit my sight, let the earth hide thee:
Thy bones are marrowlesse, thy blood is cold:
Thou hast no speculation in those eyes
Which thou dost glare with

   La. Thinke of this good Peeres
But as a thing of Custome: 'Tis no other,
Onely it spoyles the pleasure of the time

   Macb. What man dare, I dare:
Approach thou like the rugged Russian Beare,
The arm'd Rhinoceros, or th' Hircan Tiger,
Take any shape but that, and my firme Nerues
Shall neuer tremble. Or be aliue againe,
And dare me to the Desart with thy Sword:
If trembling I inhabit then, protest mee
The Baby of a Girle. Hence horrible shadow,
Vnreall mock'ry hence. Why so, being gone
I am a man againe: pray you sit still

   La. You haue displac'd the mirth,
Broke the good meeting, with most admir'd disorder

   Macb. Can such things be,
And ouercome vs like a Summers Clowd,
Without our speciall wonder? You make me strange
Euen to the disposition that I owe,
When now I thinke you can behold such sights,
And keepe the naturall Rubie of your Cheekes,
When mine is blanch'd with feare

   Rosse. What sights, my Lord? La. I pray you speake not: he growes worse & worse
Question enrages him: at once, goodnight. Stand not vpon the order of your going,
But go at once

   Len. Good night, and better health
Attend his Maiesty

   La. A kinde goodnight to all. Exit Lords. Macb. It will haue blood they say:
Blood will haue Blood:
Stones haue beene knowne to moue, & Trees to speake:
Augures, and vnderstood Relations, haue
By Maggot Pyes, & Choughes, & Rookes brought forth
The secret'st man of Blood. What is the night? La. Almost at oddes with morning, which is which

   Macb. How say'st thou that Macduff denies his person
At our great bidding

   La. Did you send to him Sir? Macb. I heare it by the way: But I will send:
There's not a one of them but in his house
I keepe a Seruant Feed. I will to morrow
(And betimes I will) to the weyard Sisters. More shall they speake: for now I am bent to know
By the worst meanes, the worst, for mine owne good,
All causes shall giue way. I am in blood
Stept in so farre, that should I wade no more,
Returning were as tedious as go ore:
Strange things I haue in head, that will to hand,
Which must be acted, ere they may be scand

   La. You lacke the season of all Natures, sleepe

   Macb. Come, wee'l to sleepe: My strange & self-abuse
Is the initiate feare, that wants hard vse:
We are yet but yong indeed. Exeunt. Scena Quinta. Thunder. Enter the three Witches, meeting Hecat. 1. Why how now Hecat, you looke angerly? Hec. Haue I not reason (Beldams) as you are? Sawcy, and ouer-bold, how did you dare
To Trade, and Trafficke with Macbeth,
In Riddles, and Affaires of death;
And I the Mistris of your Charmes,
The close contriuer of all harmes,
Was neuer call'd to beare my part,
Or shew the glory of our Art? And which is worse, all you haue done
Hath bene but for a wayward Sonne,
Spightfull, and wrathfull, who (as others do)
Loues for his owne ends, not for you. But make amends now: Get you gon,
And at the pit of Acheron
Meete me i'th' Morning: thither he
Will come, to know his Destinie. Your Vessels, and your Spels prouide,
Your Charmes, and euery thing beside;
I am for th' Ayre: This night Ile spend
Vnto a dismall, and a Fatall end. Great businesse must be wrought ere Noone. Vpon the Corner of the Moone
There hangs a vap'rous drop, profound,
Ile catch it ere it come to ground;
And that distill'd by Magicke slights,
Shall raise such Artificiall Sprights,
As by the strength of their illusion,
Shall draw him on to his Confusion. He shall spurne Fate, scorne Death, and beare
His hopes 'boue Wisedome, Grace, and Feare:
And you all know, Security
Is Mortals cheefest Enemie. Musicke, and a Song. Hearke, I am call'd: my little Spirit see
Sits in Foggy cloud, and stayes for me. Sing within. Come away, come away, &c.

  1 Come, let's make hast, shee'l soone be
Backe againe. Exeunt. Scaena Sexta. Enter Lenox, and another Lord. Lenox. My former Speeches,
Haue but hit your Thoughts
Which can interpret farther: Onely I say
Things haue bin strangely borne. The gracious Duncan
Was pittied of Macbeth: marry he was dead:
And the right valiant Banquo walk'd too late,
Whom you may say (if't please you) Fleans kill'd,
For Fleans fled: Men must not walke too late. Who cannot want the thought, how monstrous
It was for Malcolme, and for Donalbane
To kill their gracious Father? Damned Fact,
How it did greeue Macbeth? Did he not straight
In pious rage, the two delinquents teare,
That were the Slaues of drinke, and thralles of sleepe? Was not that Nobly done? I, and wisely too:
For 'twould haue anger'd any heart aliue
To heare the men deny't. So that I say,
He ha's borne all things well, and I do thinke,
That had he Duncans Sonnes vnder his Key,
(As, and't please Heauen he shall not) they should finde
What 'twere to kill a Father: So should Fleans. But peace; for from broad words, and cause he fayl'd
His presence at the Tyrants Feast, I heare
Macduffe liues in disgrace. Sir, can you tell
Where he bestowes himselfe? Lord. The Sonnes of Duncane
(From whom this Tyrant holds the due of Birth)
Liues in the English Court, and is receyu'd
Of the most Pious Edward, with such grace,
That the maleuolence of Fortune, nothing
Takes from his high respect. Thither Macduffe
Is gone, to pray the Holy King, vpon his ayd
To wake Northumberland, and warlike Seyward,
That by the helpe of these (with him aboue)
To ratifie the Worke) we may againe
Giue to our Tables meate, sleepe to our Nights:
Free from our Feasts, and Banquets bloody kniues;
Do faithfull Homage, and receiue free Honors,
All which we pine for now. And this report
Hath so exasperate their King, that hee
Prepares for some attempt of Warre

   Len. Sent he to Macduffe? Lord. He did: and with an absolute Sir, not I
The clowdy Messenger turnes me his backe,
And hums; as who should say, you'l rue the time
That clogges me with this Answer

   Lenox. And that well might
Aduise him to a Caution, t' hold what distance
His wisedome can prouide. Some holy Angell
Flye to the Court of England, and vnfold
His Message ere he come, that a swift blessing
May soone returne to this our suffering Country,
Vnder a hand accurs'd

   Lord. Ile send my Prayers with him. Exeunt. Actus Quartus. Scena Prima. Thunder. Enter the three Witches. 1 Thrice the brinded Cat hath mew'd

   2 Thrice, and once the Hedge-Pigge whin'd

   3 Harpier cries, 'tis time, 'tis time

   1 Round about the Caldron go:
In the poysond Entrailes throw
Toad, that vnder cold stone,
Dayes and Nights, ha's thirty one:
Sweltred Venom sleeping got,
Boyle thou first i'th' charmed pot

   All. Double, double, toile and trouble;
Fire burne, and Cauldron bubble

   2 Fillet of a Fenny Snake,
In the Cauldron boyle and bake:
Eye of Newt, and Toe of Frogge,
Wooll of Bat, and Tongue of Dogge:
Adders Forke, and Blinde-wormes Sting,
Lizards legge, and Howlets wing:
For a Charme of powrefull trouble,
Like a Hell-broth, boyle and bubble

   All. Double, double, toyle and trouble,
Fire burne, and Cauldron bubble

   3 Scale of Dragon, Tooth of Wolfe,
Witches Mummey, Maw, and Gulfe
Of the rauin'd salt Sea sharke:
Roote of Hemlocke, digg'd i'th' darke:
Liuer of Blaspheming Iew,
Gall of Goate, and Slippes of Yew,
Sliuer'd in the Moones Ecclipse:
Nose of Turke, and Tartars lips:
Finger of Birth-strangled Babe,
Ditch-deliuer'd by a Drab,
Make the Grewell thicke, and slab. Adde thereto a Tigers Chawdron,
For th' Ingredience of our Cawdron

   All. Double, double, toyle and trouble,
Fire burne, and Cauldron bubble

   2 Coole it with a Baboones blood,
Then the Charme is firme and good. Enter Hecat, and the other three Witches. Hec. O well done: I commend your paines,
And euery one shall share i'th' gaines:
And now about the Cauldron sing
Like Elues and Fairies in a Ring,
Inchanting all that you put in. Musicke and a Song. Blacke Spirits, &c.

  2 By the pricking of my Thumbes,
Something wicked this way comes:
Open Lockes, who euer knockes. Enter Macbeth. Macb. How now you secret, black, & midnight Hags? What is't you do? All. A deed without a name

   Macb. I coniure you, by that which you Professe,
(How ere you come to know it) answer me:
Though you vntye the Windes, and let them fight
Against the Churches: Though the yesty Waues
Confound and swallow Nauigation vp:
Though bladed Corne be lodg'd, & Trees blown downe,
Though Castles topple on their Warders heads:
Though Pallaces, and Pyramids do slope
Their heads to their Foundations: Though the treasure
Of Natures Germaine, tumble altogether,
Euen till destruction sicken: Answer me
To what I aske you

   1 Speake

   2 Demand

   3 Wee'l answer

   1 Say, if th'hadst rather heare it from our mouthes,
Or from our Masters

   Macb. Call 'em: let me see 'em

   1 Powre in Sowes blood, that hath eaten
Her nine Farrow: Greaze that's sweaten
From the Murderers Gibbet, throw
Into the Flame

   All. Come high or low:
Thy Selfe and Office deaftly show. Thunder. 1. Apparation, an Armed Head. Macb. Tell me, thou vnknowne power

   1 He knowes thy thought:
Heare his speech, but say thou nought

   1 Appar. Macbeth, Macbeth, Macbeth:
Beware Macduffe,
Beware the Thane of Fife: dismisse me. Enough. He Descends. Macb. What ere thou art, for thy good caution, thanks
Thou hast harp'd my feare aright. But one word more

   1 He will not be commanded: heere's another
More potent then the first. Thunder. 2 Apparition, a Bloody Childe. 2 Appar. Macbeth, Macbeth, Macbeth

   Macb. Had I three eares, Il'd heare thee

   Appar. Be bloody, bold, & resolute:
Laugh to scorne
The powre of man: For none of woman borne
Shall harme Macbeth. Descends. Mac. Then liue Macduffe: what need I feare of thee? But yet Ile make assurance: double sure,
And take a Bond of Fate: thou shalt not liue,
That I may tell pale-hearted Feare, it lies;
And sleepe in spight of Thunder. Thunder 3 Apparation, a Childe Crowned, with a Tree in his hand. What is this, that rises like the issue of a King,
And weares vpon his Baby-brow, the round
And top of Soueraignty? All. Listen, but speake not too't

   3 Appar. Be Lyon metled, proud, and take no care:
Who chafes, who frets, or where Conspirers are:
Macbeth shall neuer vanquish'd be, vntill
Great Byrnam Wood, to high Dunsmane Hill
Shall come against him. Descend. Macb. That will neuer bee:
Who can impresse the Forrest, bid the Tree
Vnfixe his earth-bound Root? Sweet boadments, good:
Rebellious dead, rise neuer till the Wood
Of Byrnan rise, and our high plac'd Macbeth
Shall liue the Lease of Nature, pay his breath
To time, and mortall Custome. Yet my Hart
Throbs to know one thing: Tell me, if your Art
Can tell so much: Shall Banquo's issue euer
Reigne in this Kingdome? All. Seeke to know no more

   Macb. I will be satisfied. Deny me this,
And an eternall Curse fall on you: Let me know. Why sinkes that Caldron? & what noise is this? Hoboyes

  1 Shew

   2 Shew

   3 Shew

   All. Shew his Eyes, and greeue his Hart,
Come like shadowes, so depart. A shew of eight Kings, and Banquo last, with a glasse in his hand. Macb. Thou art too like the Spirit of Banquo: Down:
Thy Crowne do's seare mine Eye-bals. And thy haire
Thou other Gold-bound-brow, is like the first:
A third, is like the former. Filthy Hagges,
Why do you shew me this? - A fourth? Start eyes! What will the Line stretch out to'th' cracke of Doome? Another yet? A seauenth? Ile see no more:
And yet the eighth appeares, who beares a glasse,
Which shewes me many more: and some I see,
That two-fold Balles, and trebble Scepters carry. Horrible sight: Now I see 'tis true,
For the Blood-bolter'd Banquo smiles vpon me,
And points at them for his. What? is this so? 1 I Sir, all this is so. But why
Stands Macbeth thus amazedly? Come Sisters, cheere we vp his sprights,
And shew the best of our delights. Ile Charme the Ayre to giue a sound,
While you performe your Antique round:
That this great King may kindly say,
Our duties, did his welcome pay. Musicke. The Witches Dance, and vanish. Macb. Where are they? Gone? Let this pernitious houre,
Stand aye accursed in the Kalender. Come in, without there. Enter Lenox. Lenox. What's your Graces will

   Macb. Saw you the Weyard Sisters? Lenox. No my Lord

   Macb. Came they not by you? Lenox. No indeed my Lord

   Macb. Infected be the Ayre whereon they ride,
And damn'd all those that trust them. I did heare
The gallopping of Horse. Who was't came by? Len. 'Tis two or three my Lord, that bring you word:
Macduff is fled to England

   Macb. Fled to England? Len. I, my good Lord

   Macb. Time, thou anticipat'st my dread exploits:
The flighty purpose neuer is o're-tooke
Vnlesse the deed go with it. From this moment,
The very firstlings of my heart shall be
The firstlings of my hand. And euen now
To Crown my thoughts with Acts: be it thoght & done:
The Castle of Macduff, I will surprize. Seize vpon Fife; giue to th' edge o'th' Sword
His Wife, his Babes, and all vnfortunate Soules
That trace him in his Line. No boasting like a Foole,
This deed Ile do, before this purpose coole,
But no more sights. Where are these Gentlemen? Come bring me where they are. Exeunt. Scena Secunda. Enter Macduffes Wife, her Son, and Rosse. Wife. What had he done, to make him fly the Land? Rosse. You must haue patience Madam

   Wife. He had none:
His flight was madnesse: when our Actions do not,
Our feares do make vs Traitors

   Rosse. You know not
Whether it was his wisedome, or his feare

   Wife. Wisedom? to leaue his wife, to leaue his Babes,
His Mansion, and his Titles, in a place
From whence himselfe do's flye? He loues vs not,
He wants the naturall touch. For the poore Wren
(The most diminitiue of Birds) will fight,
Her yong ones in her Nest, against the Owle:
All is the Feare, and nothing is the Loue;
As little is the Wisedome, where the flight
So runnes against all reason

   Rosse. My deerest Cooz,
I pray you schoole your selfe. But for your Husband,
He is Noble, Wise, Iudicious, and best knowes
The fits o'th' Season. I dare not speake much further,
But cruell are the times, when we are Traitors
And do not know our selues: when we hold Rumor
From what we feare, yet know not what we feare,
But floate vpon a wilde and violent Sea
Each way, and moue. I take my leaue of you:
Shall not be long but Ile be heere againe:
Things at the worst will cease, or else climbe vpward,
To what they were before. My pretty Cosine,
Blessing vpon you

   Wife. Father'd he is,
And yet hee's Father-lesse

   Rosse. I am so much a Foole, should I stay longer
It would be my disgrace, and your discomfort. I take my leaue at once. Exit Rosse. Wife. Sirra, your Fathers dead,
And what will you do now? How will you liue? Son. As Birds do Mother

   Wife. What with Wormes, and Flyes? Son. With what I get I meane, and so do they

   Wife. Poore Bird,
Thou'dst neuer Feare the Net, nor Lime,
The Pitfall, nor the Gin

   Son. Why should I Mother? Poore Birds they are not set for:
My Father is not dead for all your saying

   Wife. Yes, he is dead:
How wilt thou do for a Father? Son. Nay how will you do for a Husband? Wife. Why I can buy me twenty at any Market

   Son. Then you'l by 'em to sell againe

   Wife. Thou speak'st withall thy wit,
And yet I'faith with wit enough for thee

   Son. Was my Father a Traitor, Mother? Wife. I, that he was

   Son. What is a Traitor? Wife. Why one that sweares, and lyes

   Son. And be all Traitors, that do so

   Wife. Euery one that do's so, is a Traitor,
And must be hang'd

   Son. And must they all be hang'd, that swear and lye? Wife. Euery one

   Son. Who must hang them? Wife. Why, the honest men

   Son. Then the Liars and Swearers are Fools: for there
are Lyars and Swearers enow, to beate the honest men,
and hang vp them

   Wife. Now God helpe thee, poore Monkie:
But how wilt thou do for a Father? Son. If he were dead, youl'd weepe for him: if you
would not, it were a good signe, that I should quickely
haue a new Father

   Wife. Poore pratler, how thou talk'st? Enter a Messenger. Mes. Blesse you faire Dame: I am not to you known,
Though in your state of Honor I am perfect;
I doubt some danger do's approach you neerely. If you will take a homely mans aduice,
Be not found heere: Hence with your little ones
To fright you thus. Me thinkes I am too sauage:
To do worse to you, were fell Cruelty,
Which is too nie your person. Heauen preserue you,
I dare abide no longer. Exit Messenger

  Wife. Whether should I flye? I haue done no harme. But I remember now
I am in this earthly world: where to do harme
Is often laudable, to do good sometime
Accounted dangerous folly. Why then (alas)
Do I put vp that womanly defence,
To say I haue done no harme? What are these faces? Enter Murtherers. Mur. Where is your Husband? Wife. I hope in no place so vnsanctified,
Where such as thou may'st finde him

   Mur. He's a Traitor

   Son. Thou ly'st thou shagge-ear'd Villaine

   Mur. What you Egge? Yong fry of Treachery? Son. He ha's kill'd me Mother,
Run away I pray you. Exit crying Murther. Scaena Tertia. Enter Malcolme and Macduffe. Mal. Let vs seeke out some desolate shade, & there
Weepe our sad bosomes empty

   Macd. Let vs rather
Hold fast the mortall Sword: and like good men,
Bestride our downfall Birthdome: each new Morne,
New Widdowes howle, new Orphans cry, new sorowes
Strike heauen on the face, that it resounds
As if it felt with Scotland, and yell'd out
Like Syllable of Dolour

   Mal. What I beleeue, Ile waile;
What know, beleeue; and what I can redresse,
As I shall finde the time to friend: I wil. What you haue spoke, it may be so perchance. This Tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues,
Was once thought honest: you haue lou'd him well,
He hath not touch'd you yet. I am yong, but something
You may discerne of him through me, and wisedome
To offer vp a weake, poore innocent Lambe
T' appease an angry God

   Macd. I am not treacherous

   Malc. But Macbeth is. A good and vertuous Nature may recoyle
In an Imperiall charge. But I shall craue your pardon:
That which you are, my thoughts cannot transpose;
Angels are bright still, though the brightest fell. Though all things foule, would wear the brows of grace
Yet Grace must still looke so

   Macd. I haue lost my Hopes

   Malc. Perchance euen there
Where I did finde my doubts. Why in that rawnesse left you Wife, and Childe? Those precious Motiues, those strong knots of Loue,
Without leaue-taking. I pray you,
Let not my Iealousies, be your Dishonors,
But mine owne Safeties: you may be rightly iust,
What euer I shall thinke

   Macd. Bleed, bleed poore Country,
Great Tyrrany, lay thou thy basis sure,
For goodnesse dare not check thee: wear y thy wrongs,
The Title, is affear'd. Far thee well Lord,
I would not be the Villaine that thou think'st,
For the whole Space that's in the Tyrants Graspe,
And the rich East to boot

   Mal. Be not offended:
I speake not as in absolute feare of you:
I thinke our Country sinkes beneath the yoake,
It weepes, it bleeds, and each new day a gash
Is added to her wounds. I thinke withall,
There would be hands vplifted in my right:
And heere from gracious England haue I offer
Of goodly thousands. But for all this,
When I shall treade vpon the Tyrants head,
Or weare it on my Sword; yet my poore Country
Shall haue more vices then it had before,
More suffer, and more sundry wayes then euer,
By him that shall succeede

   Macd. What should he be? Mal. It is my selfe I meane: in whom I know
All the particulars of Vice so grafted,
That when they shall be open'd, blacke Macbeth
Will seeme as pure as Snow, and the poore State
Esteeme him as a Lambe, being compar'd
With my confinelesse harmes

   Macd. Not in the Legions
Of horrid Hell, can come a Diuell more damn'd
In euils, to top Macbeth

   Mal. I grant him Bloody,
Luxurious, Auaricious, False, Deceitfull,
Sodaine, Malicious, smacking of euery sinne
That ha's a name. But there's no bottome, none
In my Voluptuousnesse: Your Wiues, your Daughters,
Your Matrons, and your Maides, could not fill vp
The Cesterne of my Lust, and my Desire
All continent Impediments would ore-beare
That did oppose my will. Better Macbeth,
Then such an one to reigne

   Macd. Boundlesse intemperance
In Nature is a Tyranny: It hath beene
Th' vntimely emptying of the happy Throne,
And fall of many Kings. But feare not yet
To take vpon you what is yours: you may
Conuey your pleasures in a spacious plenty,
And yet seeme cold. The time you may so hoodwinke:
We haue willing Dames enough: there cannot be
That Vulture in you, to deuoure so many
As will to Greatnesse dedicate themselues,
Finding it so inclinde

   Mal. With this, there growes
In my most ill-composd Affection, such
A stanchlesse Auarice, that were I King,
I should cut off the Nobles for their Lands,
Desire his Iewels, and this others House,
And my more-hauing, would be as a Sawce
To make me hunger more, that I should forge
Quarrels vniust against the Good and Loyall,
Destroying them for wealth

   Macd. This Auarice
stickes deeper: growes with more pernicious roote
Then Summer-seeming Lust: and it hath bin
The Sword of our slaine Kings: yet do not feare,
Scotland hath Foysons, to fill vp your will
Of your meere Owne. All these are portable,
With other Graces weigh'd

   Mal. But I haue none. The King-becoming Graces,
As Iustice, Verity, Temp'rance, Stablenesse,
Bounty, Perseuerance, Mercy, Lowlinesse,
Deuotion, Patience, Courage, Fortitude,
I haue no rellish of them, but abound
In the diuision of each seuerall Crime,
Acting it many wayes. Nay, had I powre, I should
Poure the sweet Milke of Concord, into Hell,
Vprore the vniuersall peace, confound
All vnity on earth

   Macd. O Scotland, Scotland

   Mal. If such a one be fit to gouerne, speake:
I am as I haue spoken

   Mac. Fit to gouern? No not to liue. O Natio[n] miserable! With an vntitled Tyrant, bloody Sceptred,
When shalt thou see thy wholsome dayes againe? Since that the truest Issue of thy Throne
By his owne Interdiction stands accust,
And do's blaspheme his breed? Thy Royall Father
Was a most Sainted-King: the Queene that bore thee,
Oftner vpon her knees, then on her feet,
Dy'de euery day she liu'd. Fare thee well,
These Euils thou repeat'st vpon thy selfe,
Hath banish'd me from Scotland. O my Brest,
Thy hope ends heere

   Mal. Macduff, this Noble passion
Childe of integrity, hath from my soule
Wip'd the blacke Scruples, reconcil'd my thoughts
To thy good Truth, and Honor. Diuellish Macbeth,
By many of these traines, hath sought to win me
Into his power: and modest Wisedome pluckes me
From ouer-credulous hast: but God aboue
Deale betweene thee and me; For euen now
I put my selfe to thy Direction, and
Vnspeake mine owne detraction. Heere abiure
The taints, and blames I laide vpon my selfe,
For strangers to my Nature. I am yet
Vnknowne to Woman, neuer was forsworne,
Scarsely haue coueted what was mine owne. At no time broke my Faith, would not betray
The Deuill to his Fellow, and delight
No lesse in truth then life. My first false speaking
Was this vpon my selfe. What I am truly
Is thine, and my poore Countries to command:
Whither indeed, before they heere approach
Old Seyward with ten thousand warlike men
Already at a point, was setting foorth:
Now wee'l together, and the chance of goodnesse
Be like our warranted Quarrell. Why are you silent? Macd. Such welcome, and vnwelcom things at once
'Tis hard to reconcile. Enter a Doctor. Mal. Well, more anon. Comes the King forth
I pray you? Doct. I Sir: there are a crew of wretched Soules
That stay his Cure: their malady conuinces
The great assay of Art. But at his touch,
Such sanctity hath Heauen giuen his hand,
They presently amend. Enter. Mal. I thanke you Doctor

   Macd. What's the Disease he meanes? Mal. Tis call'd the Euill. A most myraculous worke in this good King,
Which often since my heere remaine in England,
I haue seene him do: How he solicites heauen
Himselfe best knowes: but strangely visited people
All swolne and Vlcerous, pittifull to the eye,
The meere dispaire of Surgery, he cures,
Hanging a golden stampe about their neckes,
Put on with holy Prayers, and 'tis spoken
To the succeeding Royalty he leaues
The healing Benediction. With this strange vertue,
He hath a heauenly guift of Prophesie,
And sundry Blessings hang about his Throne,
That speake him full of Grace. Enter Rosse. Macd. See who comes heere

   Malc. My Countryman: but yet I know him not

   Macd. My euer gentle Cozen, welcome hither

   Malc. I know him now. Good God betimes remoue
The meanes that makes vs Strangers

   Rosse. Sir, Amen

   Macd. Stands Scotland where it did? Rosse. Alas poore Countrey,
Almost affraid to know it selfe. It cannot
Be call'd our Mother, but our Graue; where nothing
But who knowes nothing, is once seene to smile:
Where sighes, and groanes, and shrieks that rent the ayre
Are made, not mark'd: Where violent sorrow seemes
A Moderne extasie: The Deadmans knell,
Is there scarse ask'd for who, and good mens liues
Expire before the Flowers in their Caps,
Dying, or ere they sicken

   Macd. Oh Relation; too nice, and yet too true

   Malc. What's the newest griefe? Rosse. That of an houres age, doth hisse the speaker,
Each minute teemes a new one

   Macd. How do's my Wife? Rosse. Why well

   Macd. And all my Children? Rosse. Well too

   Macd. The Tyrant ha's not batter'd at their peace? Rosse. No, they were wel at peace, when I did leaue 'em
  Macd. Be not a niggard of your speech: How gos't? Rosse. When I came hither to transport the Tydings
Which I haue heauily borne, there ran a Rumour
Of many worthy Fellowes, that were out,
Which was to my beleefe witnest the rather,
For that I saw the Tyrants Power a-foot. Now is the time of helpe: your eye in Scotland
Would create Soldiours, make our women fight,
To doffe their dire distresses

   Malc. Bee't their comfort
We are comming thither: Gracious England hath
Lent vs good Seyward, and ten thousand men,
An older, and a better Souldier, none
That Christendome giues out

   Rosse. Would I could answer
This comfort with the like. But I haue words
That would be howl'd out in the desert ayre,
Where hearing should not latch them

   Macd. What concerne they,
The generall cause, or is it a Fee-griefe
Due to some single brest? Rosse. No minde that's honest
But in it shares some woe, though the maine part
Pertaines to you alone

   Macd. If it be mine
Keepe it not from me, quickly let me haue it

   Rosse. Let not your eares dispise my tongue for euer,
Which shall possesse them with the heauiest sound
that euer yet they heard

   Macd. Humh: I guesse at it

   Rosse. Your Castle is surpriz'd: your Wife, and Babes
Sauagely slaughter'd: To relate the manner
Were on the Quarry of these murther'd Deere
To adde the death of you

   Malc. Mercifull Heauen:
What man, ne're pull your hat vpon your browes:
Giue sorrow words; the griefe that do's not speake,
Whispers the o're-fraught heart, and bids it breake

   Macd. My Children too? Ro. Wife, Children, Seruants, all that could be found

   Macd. And I must be from thence? My wife kil'd too? Rosse. I haue said

   Malc. Be comforted. Let's make vs Med'cines of our great Reuenge,
To cure this deadly greefe

   Macd. He ha's no Children. All my pretty ones? Did you say All? Oh Hell-Kite! All? What, All my pretty Chickens, and their Damme
At one fell swoope? Malc. Dispute it like a man

   Macd. I shall do so:
But I must also feele it as a man;
I cannot but remember such things were
That were most precious to me: Did heauen looke on,
And would not take their part? Sinfull Macduff,
They were all strooke for thee: Naught that I am,
Not for their owne demerits, but for mine
Fell slaughter on their soules: Heauen rest them now

   Mal. Be this the Whetstone of your sword, let griefe
Conuert to anger: blunt not the heart, enrage it

   Macd. O I could play the woman with mine eyes,
And Braggart with my tongue. But gentle Heauens,
Cut short all intermission: Front to Front,
Bring thou this Fiend of Scotland, and my selfe
Within my Swords length set him, if he scape
Heauen forgiue him too

   Mal. This time goes manly:
Come go we to the King, our Power is ready,
Our lacke is nothing but our leaue. Macbeth
Is ripe for shaking, and the Powres aboue
Put on their Instruments: Receiue what cheere you may,
The Night is long, that neuer findes the Day. Exeunt. Actus Quintus. Scena Prima. Enter a Doctor of Physicke, and a Wayting Gentlewoman. Doct. I haue too Nights watch'd with you, but can
perceiue no truth in your report. When was it shee last
walk'd? Gent. Since his Maiesty went into the Field, I haue
seene her rise from her bed, throw her Night-Gown vppon
her, vnlocke her Closset, take foorth paper, folde it,
write vpon't, read it, afterwards Seale it, and againe returne
to bed; yet all this while in a most fast sleepe

   Doct. A great perturbation in Nature, to receyue at
once the benefit of sleep, and do the effects of watching. In this slumbry agitation, besides her walking, and other
actuall performances, what (at any time) haue you heard
her say? Gent. That Sir, which I will not report after her

   Doct. You may to me, and 'tis most meet you should

   Gent. Neither to you, nor any one, hauing no witnesse
to confirme my speech. Enter Lady, with a Taper. Lo you, heere she comes: This is her very guise, and vpon
my life fast asleepe: obserue her, stand close

   Doct. How came she by that light? Gent. Why it stood by her: she ha's light by her continually,
'tis her command

   Doct. You see her eyes are open

   Gent. I, but their sense are shut

   Doct. What is it she do's now? Looke how she rubbes her hands

   Gent. It is an accustom'd action with her, to seeme
thus washing her hands: I haue knowne her continue in
this a quarter of an houre

   Lad. Yet heere's a spot

   Doct. Heark, she speaks, I will set downe what comes
from her, to satisfie my remembrance the more strongly

   La. Out damned spot: out I say. One: Two: Why
then 'tis time to doo't: Hell is murky. Fye, my Lord, fie,
a Souldier, and affear'd? what need we feare? who knowes
it, when none can call our powre to accompt: yet who
would haue thought the olde man to haue had so much
blood in him

   Doct. Do you marke that? Lad. The Thane of Fife, had a wife: where is she now? What will these hands ne're be cleane? No more o'that
my Lord, no more o'that: you marre all with this starting

   Doct. Go too, go too:
You haue knowne what you should not

   Gent. She ha's spoke what shee should not, I am sure
of that: Heauen knowes what she ha's knowne

   La. Heere's the smell of the blood still: all the perfumes
of Arabia will not sweeten this little hand. Oh, oh, oh

   Doct. What a sigh is there? The hart is sorely charg'd

   Gent. I would not haue such a heart in my bosome,
for the dignity of the whole body

   Doct. Well, well, well

   Gent. Pray God it be sir

   Doct. This disease is beyond my practise: yet I haue
knowne those which haue walkt in their sleep, who haue
dyed holily in their beds

   Lad. Wash your hands, put on your Night-Gowne,
looke not so pale: I tell you yet againe Banquo's buried;
he cannot come out on's graue

   Doct. Euen so? Lady. To bed, to bed: there's knocking at the gate:
Come, come, come, come, giue me your hand: What's
done, cannot be vndone. To bed, to bed, to bed. Exit Lady. Doct. Will she go now to bed? Gent. Directly

   Doct. Foule whisp'rings are abroad: vnnaturall deeds
Do breed vnnaturall troubles: infected mindes
To their deafe pillowes will discharge their Secrets:
More needs she the Diuine, then the Physitian:
God, God forgiue vs all. Looke after her,
Remoue from her the meanes of all annoyance,
And still keepe eyes vpon her: So goodnight,
My minde she ha's mated, and amaz'd my sight. I thinke, but dare not speake

   Gent. Good night good Doctor. Exeunt. Scena Secunda. Drum and Colours. Enter Menteth, Cathnes, Angus, Lenox,
Soldiers. Ment. The English powre is neere, led on by Malcolm,
His Vnkle Seyward, and the good Macduff. Reuenges burne in them: for their deere causes
Would to the bleeding, and the grim Alarme
Excite the mortified man

   Ang. Neere Byrnan wood
Shall we well meet them, that way are they comming

   Cath. Who knowes if Donalbane be with his brother? Len. For certaine Sir, he is not: I haue a File
Of all the Gentry; there is Seywards Sonne,
And many vnruffe youths, that euen now
Protest their first of Manhood

   Ment. What do's the Tyrant

   Cath. Great Dunsinane he strongly Fortifies:
Some say hee's mad: Others, that lesser hate him,
Do call it valiant Fury, but for certaine
He cannot buckle his distemper'd cause
Within the belt of Rule

   Ang. Now do's he feele
His secret Murthers sticking on his hands,
Now minutely Reuolts vpbraid his Faith-breach:
Those he commands, moue onely in command,
Nothing in loue: Now do's he feele his Title
Hang loose about him, like a Giants Robe
Vpon a dwarfish Theefe

   Ment. Who then shall blame
His pester'd Senses to recoyle, and start,
When all that is within him, do's condemne
It selfe, for being there

   Cath. Well, march we on,
To giue Obedience, where 'tis truly ow'd:
Meet we the Med'cine of the sickly Weale,
And with him poure we in our Countries purge,
Each drop of vs

   Lenox. Or so much as it needes,
To dew the Soueraigne Flower, and drowne the Weeds:
Make we our March towards Birnan. Exeunt. marching. Scaena Tertia. Enter Macbeth, Doctor, and Attendants. Macb. Bring me no more Reports, let them flye all:
Till Byrnane wood remoue to Dunsinane,
I cannot taint with Feare. What's the Boy Malcolme? Was he not borne of woman? The Spirits that know
All mortall Consequences, haue pronounc'd me thus:
Feare not Macbeth, no man that's borne of woman
Shall ere haue power vpon thee. Then fly false Thanes,
And mingle with the English Epicures,
The minde I sway by, and the heart I beare,
Shall neuer sagge with doubt, nor shake with feare. Enter Seruant. The diuell damne thee blacke, thou cream-fac'd Loone:
Where got'st thou that Goose-looke

   Ser. There is ten thousand

   Macb. Geese Villaine?