(to Lord J.). Phoo, Phoo! he's only denying it out of false
modesty. Lord. J. Well, no matter who wrote it,--sing it again. Rory. Be easy; so I will, and as many more verses as you will to the
back of it. (Winking at Talbot aside.) You shall have the credit of
all. (Aloud.) Put me in when I'm out, Talbot, and you (to Lord John)
join--join. Rory sings, and Lord John sings with him. "Then there's he with the purse that's as long as my arm;
      His father's a tanner,--but then where's the harm? Heir to houses, and hunters, and horseponds in fee,
      Won't his skins sure soon buy him a pedigree? There's my lord with the back that never was bent--"

(Lord John stops singing; Talbot makes signs to Rory to stop; but Rory
does not see him, and sings on.) "There's my lord with the back that never was bent;
      Let him live with his ancestors, I am content." (Rory pushes Lord J. and Talbot with his elbows.) Rory. Join, join, both of ye--why don't you join? (Sings.) "Who'll buy my Lord John? the arch fishwoman cried,
      A nice oyster shut up in a choice shell of pride." Rory. But join or ye spoil all. Talb. You have spoiled all, indeed. Lord J. (making a formal low bow). Mr. Talbot, Lord John thanks you. Rory. Lord John! blood and thunder! I forgot you were by--quite and
clean. Lord J. (puts him aside and continues speaking to Talbot). Lord John
thanks you, Mr. Talbot:  this is the second part of the caricature. Lord
John thanks you for these proofs of friendship--Lord John has reason to
thank you, Mr. Talbot. Rory. No reason in life now. Don't be thanking so much for nothing in
life; or if you must be thanking of somebody, it's me you ought to thank. Lord J.  I ought and do, sir, for unmasking one who--

Talb. (warmly). Unmasking, my lord--

Rory (holding them asunder). Phoo! phoo! phoo! be easy, can't ye?--
there's no unmasking at all in the case. My Lord John, Talbot's writing
the song was all a mistake. Lord J. As much a mistake as your singing it, sir, I presume--

Rory. Just as much. 'Twas all a mistake. So now don't you go and make
a mistake into a misunderstanding. It was I made every word of the song
out o' the face*--that about the back that never was bent, and the
ancestors of the oyster, and all. He did not waste a word of it; upon my
conscience, I wrote it all--though I'll engage you didn't think I could
write a good thing. (Lord John turns away.) I'm telling you the truth,
and not a word of a lie, and yet you won't believe me. *From beginning to end. Lord J. You will excuse me, sir, if I cannot believe two contradictory
assertions within two minutes. Mr. Talbot, I thank you (going). (Rory tries to stop Lord John from going, but cannot.--Exit Lord John.) Rory. Well, if he WILL go, let him go then, and much good may it do him. Nay, but don't you go too. Talb. O Rory, what have you done?--(Talbot runs after Lord J.) Hear me,
my lord. (Exit Talbot.) Rory. Hear him! hear him! hear him!--Well, I'm point blank mad with
myself for making this blunder; but how could I help it? As sure as ever
I am meaning to do the best thing on earth, it turns out the worst. Enter a party of lads, huzzaing. Rory (joins.) Huzza! huzza!--Who, pray, are ye huzzaing for? 1st Boy. Wheeler! Wheeler for ever! huzza! Rory. Talbot! Talbot for ever! huzza! Captain Talbot for ever! huzza! 2nd Boy. CAPTAIN he'll never be,--at least not to-morrow; for Lord John
has just declared for Wheeler. lst Boy. And that turns the scale. Rory. Oh, the scale may turn back again. 3rd Boy. Impossible! Lord John has just given his promise to Wheeler. I heard him with my own ears. (Several speak at once.) And I heard him; and I! and I! and I!--Huzza! Wheeler for ever! Rory. Oh, murder! murder! murder! (Aside.) This goes to my heart! it's
all my doing. O, my poor Talbot!-- murder! murder! murder! But I won't
let them see me cast down, and it is good to be huzzaing at all events. Huzza for Talbot! Talbot for ever! huzza! (Exit.) Enter WHEELER and BURSAL. Wheel. Who was that huzzaing for Talbot? (Rory behind the scenes, "Huzza for Talbot! Talbot for ever! huzza!") Burs. Pooh, it is only Rory O'Ryan, or the roaring lion as I call him. Ha! ha! ha! Rory O'Ryan, alias O'Ryan, the roaring lion; that's a good
one; put it about--Rory O'Ryan, the roaring lion, ha! ha! ha! but you
don't take it--you don't laugh, Wheeler. Wheeler. Ha! ha! ha! O, upon my honour I do laugh; ha! ha! ha! (Aside). It is the hardest work to laugh at his wit. (Aloud.) Rory
O'Ryan, the roaring lion--ha! ha! ha! You know I always laugh, Bursal,
at your jokes--he! he! he!--ready to kill myself. Burs. (sullenly). You are easily killed, then, if that much laughing
will do the business. Wheel. (coughing). Just then--something stuck in my throat; I beg your
pardon. Burs. (still sullen). Oh, you need not beg my pardon about the matter. I don't care whether you laugh or no--not I. Now you have got Lord John
to declare for you, you are above laughing at my jokes, I suppose. Wheel. No, upon my word and honour, I DID laugh. Burs. (aside). A fig for your word and honour. (Aloud.) I know I'm of
no consequence now;  but you'll remember, that if his lordship has the
honour of making you captain, he must have the honour to pay for your
captain's accoutrements; for I sha'n't pay the piper, I promise you,
since I'm of no consequence. Wheel. Of no consequence! But, my dear Bursal, what could put that into
your head? that's the strangest, oddest fancy. Of no consequence! Bursal, of no consequence! Why, everybody that knows anything--everybody
that has seen Bursal House--knows that you are of the greatest
consequence, my dear Bursal. Burs. (taking out his watch, and opening it, looks at it). No, I'm of no
consequence. I wonder that rascal Finsbury is not come yet with the
dresses (still looking at his watch). Wheel. (aside). If Bursal takes it into his head not to lend me the
money to pay for my captain's dress, what will become of me? for I have
not a shilling--and Lord John won't pay for me--and Finsbury has orders
not to leave the house till he is paid by everybody. What will become of
me?--(bites his nails). Burs. (aside). How I love to make him bite his nails! (Aloud.) I know
I'm of no consequence. (Strikes his repeater.) Wheel. What a fine repeater that is of yours, Bursal! It is the best I
ever heard. Burs. So it well may be; for it cost a mint of money. Wheel. No matter to you what anything costs. Happy dog as you are! You
roll in money; and yet you talk of being of no consequence. Burs. But I am not of half so much consequence as Lord John--am I? Wheel. Are you? Why, aren't you twice as rich as he! Burs. Very true, but I'm not purse-proud. Wheel. You purse-proud! I should never have thought of such a thing. Burs. Nor I, if Talbot had not used the word. Wheel. But Talbot thinks everybody purse-proud that has a purse. Burs. (aside). Well, this Wheeler does put one into a good humour with
one's self in spite of one's teeth. (Aloud.) Talbot says blunt things;
but I don't think he's what you can call clever--hey, Wheeler? Wheel. Clever? Oh, not he. Burs. I think I could walk round him. Wheel. To be sure you could. Why, do you know, I've quizzed him
famously myself within this quarter of an hour! Burs. Indeed! I wish I had been by. Wheel. So do I, 'faith! It was the best thing. I wanted, you see, to
get him out of my way, that I might have the field clear for
electioneering to-day. So I bowls up to him with a long face--such a
face as this. Mr. Talbot, do you know--I'm sorry to tell you, here's
Jack Smith has just brought the news from Salt Hill. Your mother, in
getting into the carriage, slipped, and has BROKE her leg, and there
she's lying at a farmhouse, two miles off. Is not it true, Jack? said I.
I saw the farmer helping her in with my own eyes, cries Jack. Off goes
Talbot like an arrow. Quizzed him, quizzed him! said I.

Burs. Ha! ha! ha! quizzed him indeed, with all his cleverness; that was
famously done. Wheel. Ha! ha! ha! With all his cleverness he will be all the evening
hunting for the farmhouse and the mother that has broke her leg; so he is
out of our way. Burs. But what need have you to want him out of your way, now Lord John
has come over to your side? You have the thing at a dead beat. Wheel. Not so dead either; for there's a great independent party, you
know; and if YOU don't help me, Bursal, to canvass them, I shall be no
captain. It is you I depend upon after all. Will you come and canvass
them with me? Dear Bursal, pray--all depends upon you. (Pulls him by the arm--Bursal follows.) Burs. Well, if all depends upon me, I'll see what I can do for you. (Aside.) Then I am of some consequence! Money makes a man of some
consequence, I see; at least with some folks. SCENE II. In the back scene a flock of sheep are seen penned. In front, a party of
country lads and lasses, gaily dressed, as in sheep-shearing time, with
ribands and garlands of flowers, etc., are dancing and singing. Enter PATTY, dressed as the Queen of the Festival, with a lamb in her
arms. The dancers break off when she comes in, and direct their
attention towards her. 1st Peasant. Oh, here comes Patty! Here comes the Queen o' the day. What has kept you from us so long, Patty? 2nd Peasant. "Please your Majesty," you should say. Patty. This poor little lamb of mine was what kept me so long. It
strayed away from the rest; and I should have lost him, so I should, for
ever, if it had not been for a good young gentleman. Yonder he is,
talking to Farmer Hearty. That's the young gentleman who pulled my lamb
out of the ditch for me, into which he had fallen--pretty creature! 1st Peasant. Pretty creature--or, your Majesty, whichever you choose to
be called--come and dance with them, and I'll carry your lamb. (Exeunt, singing and dancing.) Enter FARMER HEARTY and TALBOT. Farmer. Why, young gentleman, I'm glad I happened to light upon you
here, and so to hinder you from going farther astray, and set your heart
at ease like. Talb. Thanks, good farmer, you have set my heart at ease, indeed. But
the truth is, they did frighten me confoundedly--more fool I. Farm. No fool at all, to my notion. I should, at your age, ay, or at my
age, just the self-same way have been frightened myself, if so be that
mention had been made to me, that way, of my own mother's having broke
her leg or so. And greater, by a great deal, the shame for them that
frighted you, than for you to be frighted. How young gentlemen, now, can
bring themselves for to tell such lies, is to me, now, a matter of
amazement, like, that I can't noways get over. Talb. Oh, farmer, such lies are very witty, though you and I don't just
now like the wit of them. This is fun, this is quizzing; but you don't
know what we young gentlemen mean by quizzing. Farm. Ay, but I do though, to my cost, ever since last year. Look you,
now, at yon fine field of wheat. Well, it was just as fine, and finer,
last year, till a young Eton jackanapes--

Talb. Take care what you say, farmer; for I am a young Eton jackanapes. Farm. No; but you be not the young Eton jackanapes that I'm a-thinking
on. I tell you it was this time last year, man; he was a-horseback, I
tell ye, mounted upon a fine bay hunter, out a-hunting, like. Talb. I tell you it was this time last year, man, that I was mounted
upon a fine bay hunter, out a-hunting. Farm. Zooks! would you argufy a man out of his wits? You won't go for
to tell me that you are that impertinent little jackanapes! Talb. No! no! I'll not tell you that I am an impertinent little
jackanapes! Farm (wiping his forehead). Well, don't then, for I can't believe it;
and you put me out. Where was I? Talb. Mounted upon a fine bay hunter. Farm. Ay, so he was. "Here, YOU," says he, meaning me--"open this gate
for me." Now, if he had but a-spoke me fair, I would not have gainsaid
him:  but he falls to swearing, so I bid him open the gate for himself. "There's a bull behind you, farmer," says he. I turns. "Quizzed him!" cries my jackanapes, and off he gallops him, through the very thick of my
corn; but he got a fall, leaping the ditch out yonder, which pacified me,
like, at the minute. So I goes up to see whether he was killed; but he
was not a whit the worse for his tumble. So I should ha' fell into a
passion with him then, to be sure, about my corn; but his horse had got
such a terrible sprain, I couldn't say anything to him; for I was a-
pitying the poor animal. As fine a hunter as ever you saw! I am sartain
sure he could never come to good after. Talb. (aside). I do think, from the description, that this was Wheeler;
and I have paid for the horse which he spoiled! (Aloud.) Should you know
either the man or the horse again, if you were to see them? Farm. Ay, that I should, to my dying day. Talb. Will you come with me, then, and you'll do me some guineas' worth
of service? Farm. Ay, that I will, with a deal of pleasure; for you be a civil
spoken young gentleman; and, besides, I don't think the worse on you for
being FRIGHTED a little about your mother; being what I might ha' been,
at your age, myself; for I had a mother myself once. So lead on, master. (Exeunt.) END OF THE SECOND ACT. ACT THE THIRD. SCENE I. The garden of the "Windmill Inn," at Salt Hill. MISS BURSAL, MRS. NEWINGTON, SALLY, the Chambermaid. (Miss Bursal, in a fainting state, is sitting on a garden stool, and
leaning her head against the Landlady. Sally is holding a glass of water
and a smelling bottle.) Miss Bursal. Where am I? Where am I? Landlady. At the "Windmill," at Salt Hill, young lady; and ill or well,
you can't be better. Sally. Do you find yourself better since coming into the air, miss? Miss B. Better! Oh, I shall never be better! (Leans her head on hand, and rocks herself backwards and forwards.) Landlady. My dear young lady, don't take on so. (Aside.) Now would I
give something to know what it was my Lady Piercefield said to the
father, and what the father said to this one, and what's the matter at
the bottom of affairs. Sally, did you hear anything at the doors? Sally (aside). No, indeed, ma'am; I never BE'S at the doors. Landlady (aside). Simpleton! (Aloud.) But, my dear Miss Bursal, if I
may be so bold--if you'd only disembosom your mind of what's on it--

Miss B.  Disembosom my mind! Nonsense! I've nothing on my mind. Pray
leave me, madam. Landlady (aside). Madam, indeed! madam, forsooth! Oh, I'll make her pay
for that! That MADAM shall go down in the bill, as sure as my name's
Newington. (Landlady, in a higher tone.) Well, I wish you better,
ma'am. I suppose I'd best send your own servant? Miss B. (sullenly). Yes, I suppose so. (To Sally.) You need not wait,
child, nor look so curious. Sally. CUR'OUS! Indeed, miss, if I look a little CUR'OUS, or so
(looking at her dress), 'tis only because I was FRIGHTED to see you take
on, which made me forget my clean apron, when I came out; and this apron-
-

Miss B.  Hush! Hush! child. Don't tell me about clean aprons, nor run
on with your vulgar talk. Is there ever a seat one can set on in that
_H_arbour yonder? Sally. O dear 'ART, yes, miss; 'tis the pleasantest _H_arbour on
_H_earth. Be pleased to lean on my _H_arm, and you'll soon be there. Miss B. (going). Then tell my woman she need not come to me, and let
nobody INTERUDE on me--do you 'EAR? (Aside.) Oh, what will become of
me? and the Talbots will soon know it! And the ponies, and the curricle,
and the vis-a-vis--what will become of them? and how shall I make my
appearance at the Montem, or any WARE else? SCENE II. LORD JOHN--WHEELER--BURSAL. Wheeler. Well, but my lord--Well, but Bursal--though my Lady
Piercefield--though Miss Bursal is come to Salt Hill, you won't leave us
all at sixes and sevens. What can we do without you? Lord J. You can do very well without me. Bursal. You can do very well without me. Wheel. (to Burs.). Impossible!--impossible! You know Mr. Finsbury will
be here just now, with the dresses; and we have to try them on. Burs. And to pay for them. Wheel. And to settle about the procession. And then, my lord, the
election is to come on this evening. You won't go till that's over, as
your lordship has PROMISED me your lordship's vote and interest. Lord J. My vote I promised you, Mr. Wheeler; but I said not a syllable
about my INTEREST. My friends, perhaps, have not been offended, though I
have, by Mr. Talbot. I shall leave them to their own inclinations. Burs. (whistling). Wheugh! wheugh! wheugh! Wheeler, the principal's
nothing without the interest. Wheel. Oh, the interest will go along with the principal, of course; for
I'm persuaded, if my lord leaves his friends to their inclinations, it
will be the inclination of my lord's friends to vote as he does, if he
says nothing to them to the contrary. Lord J.  I told you, Mr. Wheeler, that I should leave them to themselves. Burs. (still whistling). Well, I'll do my best to make that father of
mine send me off to Oxford. I'm sure I'm fit to go--along with Wheeler. Why, you'd best be my tutor, Wheeler!--a devilish good thought. Wheel. An excellent thought. Burs. And a cursed fine dust we should kick up at Oxford, with your
Montem money and all!--Money's THE GO after all. I wish it was come to
my making you my last bow, "ye distant spires, ye ANTIC towers!" Wheel. (aside to Lord J.). Ye ANTIC towers!--fit for Oxford, my lord! Lord J. Antique towers, I suppose Mr. Bursal means. Burs. Antique, to be sure!--I said antique, did not I, Wheeler? Wheel. O, yes. Lord J. (aside). What a mean animal is this! Enter RORY O'RYAN. Rory. Why, now, what's become of Talbot, I want to know? There he is
not to be found anywhere in the wide world; and there's a hullabaloo
amongst his friends for him. (Wheeler and Bursal wink at one another.) Wheel. We know nothing of him. Lord J.  I have not the honour, sir, to be one of Mr. Talbot's friends. It is his own fault, and I am sorry for it. Rory. 'Faith, so am I, especially as it is mine--fault I mean; and
especially as the election is just going to come on. Enter a party of boys, who cry, Finsbury's come!--Finsbury's come with
the dresses! Wheel. Finsbury's come? Oh, let us see the dresses, and let us try 'em
on to-night. Burs. (pushing the crowd). On with ye--on with ye, there!--Let's try 'em
on!--Try 'em on--I'm to be colonel. lst Boy. And I lieutenant. 2nd Boy. And I ensign. 3rd Boy. And I college salt-bearer. 4th Boy. And I oppidan. 5th Boy. Oh, what a pity I'm in mourning. Several speak at once. And we are servitors. We are to be the eight servitors. Wheel. And I am to be your Captain, I hope. Come on, my Colonel. (To
Bursal). My lord, you are coming? Rory. By-and-by--I've a word in his ear, by your LAVE and his. Burs. Why, what the devil stops the way, there?--Push on--on with them. 6th Boy. I'm marshal. Burs. On with you--on with you--who cares what you are? Wheel. (to Bursal, aside). You'll pay Finsbury for me, you rich Jew? (To Lord John.) Your lordship will remember your lordship's promise. Lord J.  I do not usually forget my promises, sir; and therefore need not
to be reminded of them. Wheel. I beg pardon--I beg ten thousand pardons, my lord. Burs. (taking him by the arm). Come on, man, and don't stand begging
pardon there, or I'll leave you. Wheel. (to Burs.) I beg pardon, Bursal--I beg pardon, ten thousand times. (Exeunt.) Manent LORD JOHN and RORY O'RYAN. Rory. Wheugh!--Now put the case. If I was going to be hanged, for the
life of me I couldn't be after begging so many pardons for nothing at
all. But many men, many minds--(Hums.) True game to the last! No
Wheeler for me. Oh, murder! I forgot, I was nigh letting the cat out o'
the bag again. Lord J. You had something to say to me, sir? I wait till your
recollection returns. Rory. 'Faith, and that's very kind of you; and if you had always done
so, you would never have been offended with me, my lord. Lord J. You are mistaken, Mr. O'Ryan, if you think that you did or could
offend me. Rory. Mistaken was I, then, sure enough; but we are all liable to
mistakes, and should forget and forgive one another; that's the way to go
through. Lord J. You will go through the world your own way, Mr. O'Ryan, and
allow me to go through it my way. Rory. Very fair--fair enough--then we shan't cross. But now, to come to
the point. I don't like to be making disagreeable retrospects, if I
could any way avoid it; nor to be going about the bush, especially at
this time o' day; when, as Mr. Finsbury's come, we've not so much time to
lose as we had. Is there any truth, then, my lord, in the report that is
going about this hour past, that you have gone in a huff, and given your
promise there to that sneaking Wheeler to vote for him now? Lord J. In answer to your question, sir, I am to inform you that I HAVE
promised Mr. Wheeler to vote for him. Rory. In a huff?--Ay, now, there it is!--Well, when a man's MAD, to be
sure, he's mad--and that's all that can be said about it. And I know, if
I had been MAD myself, I might have done a foolish thing as well as
another. But now, my lord, that you are not mad--

Lord J.  I protest, sir, I cannot understand you. In one word, sir, I'm
neither mad nor a fool!--Your most obedient (going, angrily). Rory (holding him). Take care now; you are going mad with me again. But
phoo! I like you the better for being mad. I'm very often mad myself,
and I would not give a potato for one that had never been mad in his
life. Lord J. (aside). He'll not be quiet, till he makes me knock him down. Rory. Agh! agh! agh!--I begin to guess whereabouts I am at last. MAD,
in your country, I take it, means fit for Bedlam; but with us in Ireland,
now, 'tis no such thing; it mean's nothing in life but the being in a
passion. Well, one comfort is, my lord, as you're a bit of a scholar, we
have the Latin proverb in our favour--"Ira furor brevis est"  (Anger is
short madness). The shorter the better, I think. So, my lord, to put an
end to whatever of the kind you may have felt against poor Talbot, I'll
assure you he's as innocent o' that unfortunate song as the babe unborn. Lord J. It is rather late for Mr. Talbot to make apologies to me. Rory. He make apologies! Not he, 'faith; he'd send me to Coventry, or,
maybe, to a worse place, did he but know I was condescending to make this
bit of explanation, unknown to him. But, upon my conscience, I've a
regard for you both, and don't like to see you go together by the ears. Now, look you, my lord. By this book, and all the books that were ever
shut and opened, he never saw or heard of that unlucky song of mine till
I came out with it this morning. Lord J. But you told me this morning that it was he who wrote it. Rory. For that I take shame to myself, as it turned out; but it was only
a WHITE lie to SARVE a friend, and make him cut a dash with a new song at
election time. But I've done for ever with white lies. Lord J. (walking about as if agitated). I wish you had never begun with
them, Mr. O'Ryan. This may be a good joke to you; but it is none to me
or Talbot. So Talbot never wrote a word of the song? Rory. Not a word or syllable, good or bad. Lord J. And I have given my promise to vote against him. He'll lose his
election. Rory. Not if you'll give me leave to speak to your friends in your name. Lord J.  I have promised to leave them to themselves; and Wheeler, I am
sure, has engaged them by this time. Rory. Bless my body! I'll not stay prating here then. (Exit Rory.) Lord J. (follows). But what can have become of Talbot? I have been too
hasty for once in my life. Well, I shall suffer for it more than anybody
else; for I love Talbot, since he did not make the song, of which I hate
to think. (Exit.) SCENE III. A large hall in Eton College--A staircase at the end--Eton lads, dressed
in their Montem Dresses in the Scene--In front, WHEELER (dressed as
Captain), BURSAL and FINSBURY. Fins. I give you infinite credit, Mr. Wheeler, for this dress. Burs. INFINITE CREDIT! Why, he'll have no objection to that--hey,
Wheeler? But I thought Finsbury knew you too well to give you credit for
anything. Fins. You are pleased to be pleasant, sir. Mr. Wheeler knows, in that
sense of the word, it is out of my power to give him credit, and I'm sure
he would not ask it. Wheel. (aside). O, Bursal, pay him, and I'll pay you tomorrow. Burs. Now, if you weren't to be captain after all, Wheeler, what a
pretty figure you'd cut. Ha! ha! ha!--Hey? Wheel. Oh, I am as sure of being captain as of being alive. (Aside.) Do
pay for me, now, there's a good, dear fellow, before THEY (looking back)
come up. Burs. (aside). I love to make him lick the dust. (Aloud.) Hollo! here's Finsbury waiting to be paid, lads. (To the lads who are in the
back scene.) Who has paid, and who has not paid, I say? (The lads come forward, and several exclaim at once,) I've paid! I've
paid! Enter LORD JOHN and RORY O'RYAN. Rory. Oh, King of Fashion, how fine we are! Why, now, to look at ye all
one might fancy one's self at the playhouse at once, or at a fancy ball
in dear little Dublin. Come, strike up a dance. Burs. Pshaw! Wherever you come, Rory O'Ryan, no one else can be heard. Who has paid, and who has not paid, I say? Several Boys exclaim. We've all paid. 1st Boy. I've not paid, but here's my money. Several Boys. We have not paid, but here's our money. 6th Boy. Order there, I am marshal. All that have paid march off to the
staircase, and take your seats there, one by one. March! (As they march by, one by one, so as to display their dresses, Mr.
Finsbury bows, and says,)

A thousand thanks, gentlemen. Thank you, gentlemen. Thanks, gentlemen. The finest sight ever I saw out of Lon'on. Rory, as each lad passes, catches his arm, Are you a TalbotITE or a
WheelerITE? To each who answers "A Wheelerite," Rory replies, "Phoo! dance off, then. Go to the devil and shake yourself. "*   Each who
answers "A Talbotite," Rory shakes by the hand violently, singing,

     "Talbot, oh, Talbot's the dog for Rory." *This is the name of a country dance. When they have almost all passed, Lord John says, But where can Mr.
Talbot be all this time? Burs. Who knows? Who cares? Wheel. A pretty electioneerer! (Aside to Bursal.) Finsbury's waiting
to be paid. Lord J. You don't wait for me, Mr. Finsbury. You know, I have settled
with you. Fins. Yes, my lord--yes. Many thanks:  and I have left your lordship's
dress here, and everybody's dress, I believe, as bespoke. Burs. Here, Finsbury, is the money for Wheeler, who, between you and me,
is as poor as a rat. Wheeler (affecting to laugh.). Well, I hope I shall be as rich as a Jew
to-morrow. (Bursal counts money, in an ostentatious manner, into
Finsbury's hand.) Fins. A thousand thanks for all favours. Rory. You will be kind enough to LAVE Mr. Talbot's dress with me, Mr.
Finsbury, for I'm a friend. Fins. Indubitably, sir:  but the misfortune is--he! he! he!--Mr. Talbot,
sir, has bespoke no dress. Your servant, gentlemen. (Exit Finsbury.) Burs. So your friend Mr. Talbot could not afford to bespeak a dress--
(Bursal and Wheeler laugh insolently.) How comes that, I wonder? Lord J. If I'm not mistaken, here comes Talbot to answer for himself. Rory. But who, in the name of St. Patrick, has he along with him? Enter TALBOT and LANDLORD. Talb. Come in along with us, Farmer Hearty--come in. (Whilst the Farmer comes in, the boys who were sitting on the stairs,
rise and exclaim,)

Whom have we here? What now? Come down, lads; here's more fun. Rory. What's here, Talbot? Talb. An honest farmer, and a good natured landlord, who would come here
along with me to speak--

Farm. (interrupting). To speak the truth--(strikes his stick on the
ground). Landlord (unbuttoning his waistcoat). But I am so hot--so short-winded,
that (panting and puffing)--that for the soul and body of me, I cannot
say what I have got for to say. Rory. 'Faith, now, the more short winded a story, the better, to my
fancy. Burs. Wheeler, what's the matter, man? you look as if your under jaw was
broke. Farm. The matter is, young gentlemen, that there was once upon a time a
fine, bay hunter. Wheel. (squeezing up to Talbot, aside). Don't expose me, don't let him
tell. (To the Farmer.) I'll pay for the corn I spoiled. (To the
Landlord.) I'll pay for the horse. Farm. I does not want to be paid for my corn. The short of it is, young
gentlemen, this 'un here, in the fine thing-em-bobs (pointing to
Wheeler), is a shabby fellow; he went and spoiled Master Newington's best
hunter. Land. (panting). Ruinationed him! ruinationed him! Rory. But was that all the shabbiness? Now I might, or any of us might,
have had such an accident as that. I suppose he paid the gentleman for
the horse, or will do so, in good time. Land. (holding his sides). Oh, that I had but a little breath in this
body o' mine to speak all--speak on, Farmer. Farm. (striking his stick on the floor). Oons, sir, when a man's put
out, he can't go on with his story. Omnes. Be quiet, Rory--hush! (Rory puts his finger on his lips.) Farm. Why, sir, I was a-going to tell you the shabbiness--why, sir, he
did not pay the landlord, here, for the horse; but he goes and says to
the landlord, here--"Mr. Talbot had your horse on the self-same day;
'twas he did the damage; 'tis from he you must get your money." So Mr.
Talbot, here, who is another sort of a gentleman (though he has not so
fine a coat) would not see a man at a loss, that could not afford it; and
not knowing which of 'em it was that spoiled the horse, goes, when he
finds the other would not pay a farthing, and pays all. Rory (rubbing his hands). There's Talbot for ye. And, now, gentlemen
(to Wheeler and Bursal), you guess the RASON, as I do, I suppose, why he
bespoke no dress; he had not money enough to be fine--and honest, too. You are very fine, Mr. Wheeler, to do you justice. Lord J.  Pray, Mr. O'Ryan, let the farmer go on; he has more to say. How
did you find out, pray, my good friend, that it was not Talbot who
spoiled the horse! Speak loud enough to be heard by everybody. Farm. Ay, that I will--I say (very loudly) I say I saw him there
(pointing to Wheeler) take the jump which strained the horse; and I'm
ready to swear to it. Yet he let another pay; there's the shabbiness. (A general groan from all the lads. "Oh, shabby Wheeler, shabby! I'll
not vote for shabby Wheeler!") Lord J. (aside). Alas! I must vote for him. Rory sings. "True game to the last; no Wheeler for me;
      Talbot, oh, Talbot's the dog for me." (Several voices join the chorus.) Burs. Wheeler, if you are not chosen Captain, you must see and pay me
for the dress. Wheel. I am as poor as a rat. Rory. Oh, yes! oh yes! hear ye! hear ye, all manner of men--the election
is now going to begin forthwith in the big field, and Rory O'Ryan holds
the poll for Talbot. Talbot for ever!--huzza! (Exit Rory, followed by the Boys, who exclaim "Talbot for ever!--huzza!" The Landlord and Farmer join them.) Lord J.  Talbot, I am glad you are what I always thought you--I'm glad
you did not write that odious song. I would not lose such a friend for
all the songs in the world. Forgive me for my hastiness this morning. I've punished myself--I've promised to vote for Wheeler. Talb. Oh, no matter whom you vote for, my lord, if you are still my
friend, and if you know me to be yours. (They shake hands.) Lord J.  I must not say, "Huzza for Talbot!" (Exeunt.) SCENE IV. WINDSOR TERRACE. LADY PIERCEFIELD, MRS. TALBOT, LOUISA, and a little girl of six years
old, LADY VIOLETTA, daughter to LADY PIERCEFIELD. Violetta (looking at a paper which Louisa holds). I like it VERY much. Lady P.  What is it that you like VERY much, Violetta? Violet. You are not to know yet, mamma; it is--I may tell her that--it
is a little drawing that Louisa is doing for me. Louisa, I wish you
would let me show it to mamma. Louisa. And welcome, my dear; it is only a sketch of "The Little
Merchants," a story which Violetta was reading, and she asked me to try
to draw the pictures of the little merchants for her. (Whilst Lady P.
looks at the drawing, Violetta says to Louisa)

But are you in earnest, Louisa, about what you were saying to me just
now,--quite in earnest? Louisa. Yes, in earnest,--quite in earnest, my dear. Violet. And may I ask mamma, NOW? Louisa. If you please, my dear. Violet. (runs to her mother). Stoop down to me, mamma ; I've something
to whisper to you. (Lady Piercefield stoops down; Violetta throws her arms round her
mother's neck.) Violet. (aside to her mother). Mamma, do you know--you know you want a
governess for me. Lady P.  Yes, if I could find a good one. Violet. (aloud). Stoop again, mamma, I've more to whisper. (Aside to
her mother). SHE says she will be my governess, if you please. Lady P. SHE!--who is SHE? Violet. Louisa. Lady P. (patting Violetta's cheek). You are a little fool. Miss Talbot
is only playing with you. Violet. No, indeed, mamma; she is in earnest; are not you, Louisa?--Oh,
say yes! Louisa. Yes. Violet. (claps her hands). YES, mamma; do you hear YES? Louisa. If Lady Piercefield will trust you to my care, I am persuaded
that I should be much happier as your governess, my good little Violetta,
than as an humble dependent of Miss Bursal's. (Aside to her mother.) You see that, now I am put to the trial, I keep to my resolution, dear
mother. Mrs. T.  Your ladyship would not be surprised at this offer of my Louisa,
if you had heard, as we have done within these few hours, of the loss of
the East India ship in which almost our whole property was embarked. Louisa. The Bombay Castle is wrecked. Lady P.  The Bombay Castle! I have the pleasure to tell you that you are
misinformed--it was the Airly Castle that was wrecked. Louisa and Mrs. T.  Indeed! Lady P.  Yes; you may depend upon it--it was the Airly Castle that was
lost. You know I am just come from Portsmouth, where I went to meet my
brother, Governor Morton, who came home with the last India fleet, and
from whom I had the intelligence. (Here Violetta interrupts, to ask her mother for her nosegay--Lady P.
gives it to her, then goes on speaking.) Lady P.  They were in such haste, foolish people! to carry their news to
London, that they mistook one castle for another. But do you know that
Mr. Bursal loses fifty thousand pounds, it is said, by the Airly Castle! When I told him she was lost, I thought he would have dropped down. However, I found he comforted himself afterwards with a bottle of
Burgundy:  but poor Miss Bursal has been in hysterics ever since. Mrs. T.  Poor girl! My Louisa, YOU did not fall into hysterics, when I
told you of the loss of our whole fortune. (Violetta, during this dialogue, has been seated on the ground making up
a nosegay.) Violet. (aside). Fall into hysterics! What are hysterics, I wonder. Louisa. Miss Bursal is much to be pitied; for the loss of wealth will be
the loss of happiness to her. Lady P.  It is to be hoped that the loss may at least check the foolish
pride and extravagance of young Bursal, who, as my son tells me--

               (A cry of "Huzza! huzza!" behind the scenes.) Enter LORD JOHN. Lord J. (hastily). How d'ye do, mother! Miss Talbot, I give you joy. Lady P.  Take breath--take breath. Louisa. It is my brother. Mrs. T.  Here he is!--Hark! hark! (A cry behind the scenes of "Talbot and truth for ever! Huzza!") Louisa. They are chairing him. Lord J. Yes, they are chairing him; and he has been chosen for his
honourable conduct, not for his electioneering skill; for, to do him
justice, Coriolanus himself was not a worse electioneerer. Enter RORY O'RYAN and another Eton lad, carrying TALBOT in a chair,
followed by a crowd of Eton lads. Rory. By your LAVE, my lord--by your LAVE, ladies. Omnes. Huzza! Talbot and truth for ever! Huzza! Talb. Set me down! There's my mother! There's my sister! Rory. Easy, easy. Set him down? No such TING! give him t'other huzza! There's nothing like a good loud huzza in this world. Yes, there is! for, as my Lord John said just now, out of some book, or out of his own
head,--

     "One self-approving hour whole years outweighs,
      Of stupid starers and of loud huzzas." CURTAIN FALLS. FORGIVE AND FORGET. In the neighbourhood of a seaport town in the west of England, there
lived a gardener, who had one son, called Maurice, to whom he was very
partial. One day his father sent him to the neighbouring town to
purchase some garden seeds for him. When Maurice got to the seed-shop,
it was full of people, who were all impatient to be served:  first a
great tall man, and next a great fat woman pushed before him; and he
stood quietly beside the counter, waiting till somebody should be at
leisure to attend to him. At length, when all the other people who were
in the shop had got what they wanted, the shopman turned to Maurice--"And
what do you want, my patient little fellow?" said he. "I want all these seeds for my father," said Maurice, putting a list of
seeds into the shopman's hand; "and I have brought money to pay for them
all." The seedsman looked out all the seeds that Maurice wanted, and packed
them up in paper:  he was folding up some painted lady-peas, when, from a
door at the back of the shop, there came in a square, rough-faced man,
who exclaimed, the moment he came in, "Are the seeds I ordered ready?--
The wind's fair--they ought to have been aboard yesterday. And my china
jar, is it packed up and directed? where is it?" "It is up there on the shelf over your head, sir," answered the seedsman. "It is very safe, you see; but we have not had time to pack it yet. It
shall be done to-day; and we will get the seeds ready for you, sir,
immediately." "Immediately! then stir about it. The seeds will not pack themselves up. Make haste, pray." "Immediately, sir, as soon as I have done up the parcel for this little
boy." "What signifies the parcel for this little boy? He can wait, and I
cannot--wind and tide wait for no man. Here, my good lad, take your
parcel, and sheer off," said the impatient man; and, as he spoke, he took
up the parcel of seeds from the counter, as the shopman stooped to look
for a sheet of thick brown paper and packthread to tie it up. The parcel was but loosely folded up, and as the impatient man lifted it,
the weight of the peas which were withinside of it burst the paper, and
all the seeds fell out upon the floor, whilst Maurice in vain held his
hands to catch them. The peas rolled to all parts of the shop; the
impatient man swore at them, but Maurice, without being out of humour,
set about collecting them as fast as possible. Whilst the boy was busied in this manner, the man got what seeds he
wanted; and as he was talking about them, a sailor came into the shop,
and said, "Captain, the wind has changed within these five minutes, and
it looks as if we should have ugly weather." "Well, I'm glad of it," replied the rough faced man, who was the captain
of a ship. "I am glad to have a day longer to stay ashore, and I've
business enough on my hands." The captain pushed forward towards the
shop door. Maurice, who was kneeling on the floor, picking up his seeds,
saw that the captain's foot was entangled in some packthread which hung
down from the shelf on which the china jar stood. Maurice saw that, if
the captain took one more step forward, he must pull the string, so that
it would throw down the jar, round the bottom of which the packthread was
entangled. He immediately caught hold of the captain's leg, and stopped
him. "Stay! Stand still, sir!" said he, "or you will break your china
jar." The man stood still, looked, and saw how the packthread had caught in his
shoe buckle, and how it was near dragging down his beautiful china jar. "I am really very much obliged to you, my little fellow," said he. "You
have saved my jar, which I would not have broken for ten guineas, for it
is for my wife, and I've brought it safe from abroad many a league. It
would have been a pity if I had broken it just when it was safe landed. I am really much obliged to you, my little fellow, this was returning
good for evil. I am sorry I threw down your seeds, as you are such a
good natured, forgiving boy. Be so kind," continued he, turning to the
shopman, "as to reach down that china jar for me." The shopman lifted down the jar very carefully, and the captain took off
the cover, and pulled out some tulip roots. "You seem, by the quantity
of seeds you have got, to belong to a gardener. Are you fond of
gardening?" said he to Maurice. "Yes, sir," replied Maurice, "very fond of it; for my father is a
gardener, and he lets me help him at his work, and he has given me a
little garden of my own." "Then here are a couple of tulip-roots for you; and if you take care of
them, I'll promise you that you will have the finest tulips in England in
your little garden. These tulips were given to me by a Dutch merchant,
who told me that they were some of the rarest and finest in Holland. They will prosper with you, I'm sure, wind and weather permitting." Maurice thanked the gentleman, and returned home, eager to show his
precious tulip-roots to his father, and to a companion of his, the son of
a nurseryman, who lived near him. Arthur was the name of the
nurseryman's son. The first thing Maurice did, after showing his tulip-roots to his father,
was to run to Arthur's garden in search of him. Their gardens were
separated only by a low wall of loose stones:  "Arthur! Arthur! where are
you? Are you in your garden! I want you." But Arthur made no answer,
and did not, as usual, come running to meet his friend. "I know where
you are," continued Maurice, "and I'm coming to you as fast as the
raspberry-bushes will let me. I have good news for you--something you'll
be delighted to see, Arthur!--Ha!--but here is something that I am not
delighted to see, I am sure," said poor Maurice, who, when he had got
through the raspberry-bushes, and had come in sight of his own garden,
beheld his bell-glass--his beloved bell-glass, under which his cucumbers
were grown so finely--his only bell-glass, broken to pieces! "I am sorry for it," said Arthur, who stood leaning upon his spade in his
own garden; "I am afraid you will be very angry with me." "Why, was it you, Arthur, broke my bell-glass! Oh, how could you do so?" "I was throwing weeds and rubbish over the wall, and by accident a great
lump of couch-grass, with stones hanging to the roots, fell upon your
bell-glass, and broke it, as you see." Maurice lifted up the lump of couch-grass, which had fallen through the
broken glass upon his cucumbers, and he looked at his cucumbers for a
moment in silence--"Oh, my poor cucumbers! you must all die now. I shall
see all your yellow flowers withered tomorrow; but it is done, and it
cannot be helped; so, Arthur, let us say no more about it." "You are very good; I thought you would have been angry. I am sure I
should have been exceedingly angry if you had broken the glass, if it had
been mine." "Oh, forgive and forget, as my father always says; that's the best way. Look what I have got for you." Then he told Arthur the story of the
captain of the ship, and the china jar; the seeds having been thrown
down, and of the fine tulip-roots which had been given to him; and
Maurice concluded by offering one of the precious roots to Arthur, who
thanked him with great joy, and repeatedly said, "How good you were not
to be angry with me for breaking your bell-glass! I am much more sorry
for it than if you had been in a passion with me!" Arthur now went to plant his tulip-root:  and Maurice looked at the beds
which his companion had been digging, and at all the things which were
coming up in his garden. "I don't know how it is," said Arthur, "but you always seem as glad to
see the things in my garden coming up, and doing well, as if they were
all your own. I am much happier since my father came to live here, and
since you and I have been allowed to work and to play together, than I
ever was before; for you must know, before we came to live here, I had a
cousin in the house with me, who used to plague me. He was not nearly so
good-natured as you are. He never took pleasure in looking at my garden,
or at anything that I did that was well done; and he never gave me a
share of anything that he had; and so I did not like him; how could I? But, I believe that hating people makes us unhappy; for I know I never
was happy when I was quarrelling with him; and I am always happy with
you, Maurice. You know we never quarrel." It would be well for all the world if they could be convinced, like
Arthur, that to live in friendship is better than to quarrel. It would
be well for all the world if they followed Maurice's maxim of "Forgive
and Forget," when they receive, or when they imagine that they receive,
an injury. Arthur's father, Mr. Oakly, the nurseryman, was apt to take offence at
trifles; and when he thought that any of his neighbours disobliged him,
he was too proud to ask them to explain their conduct; therefore he was
often mistaken in his judgment of them. He thought that it showed
SPIRIT, to remember and to resent an injury; and, therefore, though he
was not an ill-natured man, he was sometimes led, by this mistaken idea
of SPIRIT, to do ill-natured things:  "A warm friend and a bitter enemy,"
was one of his maxims, and he had many more enemies than friends. He was
not very rich, but he was proud; and his favourite proverb was, "Better
live in spite than in pity." When first he settled near Mr. Grant, the gardener, he felt inclined to
dislike him, because he was told that Mr. Grant was a Scotchman, and he
had a prejudice against Scotchmen; all of whom he believed to be cunning
and avaricious, because he had once been over-reached by a Scotch
peddler. Grant's friendly manners in some degree conquered this
prepossession but still he secretly suspected that THIS CIVILITY, as he
said, "was all show, and that he was not, nor could not, being a
Scotchman, be such a hearty friend as a true-born Englishman." Grant had some remarkably fine raspberries. The fruit was so large, as
to be quite a curiosity. When it was in season, many strangers came from
the neighbouring town, which was a sea-bathing place, to look at these
raspberries, which obtained the name of Brobdingnag raspberries. "How came you, pray, neighbour Grant, if a man may ask, by these
wonderful fine raspberries?" said Mr. Oakly, one evening, to the
gardener. "That's a secret," replied Grant, with an arch smile. "Oh, in case it's a secret, I've no more to say; for I never meddle with
any man's secrets that he does not choose to trust me with.