"No," replied Oakly, sturdily; "his father has used me uncivil, and no
man shall use me uncivil twice. I say no. Wife, sweep up this hearth. Boy, don't take on like a fool; but eat thy bacon and greens, and let's
hear no more of Maurice Grant." Arthur promised to obey his father. He only begged that he might once
more speak to Maurice, and tell him that it was by his father's orders he
acted. This request was granted; but when Arthur further begged to know
what reason he might give for this separation, his father refused to tell
his reasons. The two friends took leave of one another very sorrowfully. Mr. Grant, when he heard of all this, endeavoured to discover what could
have offended his neighbour; but all explanation was prevented by the
obstinate silence of Oakly. Now, the message which Grant really sent about the Brobdingnag
raspberries was somewhat different from that which Mr. Oakly received. The message was, that the raspberries were not Mr. Grant's; that
therefore he had no right to give them away; that they belonged to his
son Maurice, and that this was not the right time of year for planting
them. This message had been unluckily misunderstood. Grant gave his
answer to his wife; she to a Welsh servant-girl, who did not perfectly
comprehend her mistress' broad Scotch; and she in her turn could not make
herself intelligible to Mrs. Oakly, who hated the Welsh accent, and whose
attention, when the servant-girl delivered the message, was principally
engrossed by the management of her own horse. The horse, on which Mrs.
Oakly rode this day being ill-broken, would not stand still quietly at
the gate, and she was extremely impatient to receive her answer, and to
ride on to market. Oakly, when he had once resolved to dislike his neighbour Grant, could
not long remain without finding out fresh causes of complaint. There was
in Grant's garden a plum-tree, which was planted close to the loose stone
wall that divided the garden from the nursery. The soil in which the
plum tree was planted happened not to be quite so good as that which was
on the opposite side of the wall, and the plum-tree had forced its way
through the wall, and gradually had taken possession of the ground which
it liked best. Oakly thought the plum-tree, as it belonged to Mr. Grant, had no right to
make its appearance on his ground:  an attorney told him that he might
oblige Grant to cut it down; but Mr. Grant refused to cut down his plum-
tree at the attorney's desire, and the attorney persuaded Oakly to go to
law about the business, and the lawsuit went on for some months. The attorney, at the end of this time, came to Oakly with a demand for
money to carry on his suit, assuring him that, in a short time, it would
be determined in his favour. Oakly paid his attorney ten golden guineas,
remarked that it was a great sum for him to pay, and that nothing but the
love of justice could make him persevere in this lawsuit about a bit of
ground, "which, after all," said he, "is not worth twopence. The plum-
tree does me little or no damage, but I don't like to be imposed upon by
a Scotchman." The attorney saw and took advantage of Oakly's prejudice against the
natives of Scotland; and he persuaded him, that to show the SPIRIT of a
true-born Englishman it was necessary, whatever it might cost him, to
persist in this law suit. It was soon after this conversation with the attorney that Mr. Oakly
walked, with resolute steps, towards the plum-tree, saying to himself,
"If it cost me a hundred pounds I will not let this cunning Scotchman get
the better of me." Arthur interrupted his father's reverie, by pointing to a book and some
young plants which lay upon the wall. "I fancy, father," said he, "those
things are for you, for there is a little note directed to you, in
Maurice's handwriting. Shall I bring it to you?" "Yes, let me read it, child, since I must." It contained these words:

"DEAR MR. OAKLY,--I don't know why you have quarrelled with us; I am very
sorry for it. But though you are angry with me, I am not angry with you. I hope you will not refuse some of my Brobdingnag raspberry-plants, which
you asked for a great while ago, when we were all good friends. It was
not the right time of the year to plant them, which was the reason they
were not sent to you; but it is just the right time to plant them now;
and I send you the book, in which you will find the reason why we always
put seaweed ashes about their roots; and I have got some seaweed ashes
for you. You will find the ashes in the flower-pot upon the wall. I
have never spoken to Arthur, nor he to me, since you bid us not. So,
wishing your Brobdingnag raspberries may turn out as well as ours, and
longing to be all friends again, I am, with love to dear Arthur and self,
                     "Your affectionate neighbour's son,
                                              "MAURICE GRANT. "P.S.--It is now about four months since the quarrel began, and that is a
very long while." A great part of the effect of this letter was lost upon Oakly, because he
was not very expert in reading writing, and it cost him much trouble to
spell it and put it together. However, he seemed affected by it, and
said, "I believe this Maurice loves you well enough, Arthur, and he seems
a good sort of boy; but as to the raspberries, I believe all that he says
about them is but an excuse; and, at anyrate, as I could not get 'em when
I asked for them, I'll not have 'em now. Do you hear me, I say, Arthur? What are you reading there?" Arthur was reading the page that was doubled down in the book, which
Maurice had left along with the raspberry-plants upon the wall. Arthur
read aloud as follows:--

               (Monthly Magazine, Dec. '98, p. 421.) "There is a sort of strawberry cultivated at Jersey, which is almost
covered with seaweed in the winter, in like manner as many plants in
England are with litter from the stable. These strawberries are usually
of the largeness of a middle-sized apricot, and the flavour is
particularly grateful. In Jersey and Guernsey, situate scarcely one
degree farther south than Cornwall, all kinds of fruit, pulse, and
vegetables are produced in their seasons a fortnight or three weeks
sooner than in England, even on the southern shores; and snow will
scarcely remain twenty-four hours on the earth. Although this may be
attributed to these islands being surrounded with a salt, and
consequently a moist atmosphere, yet the ashes (seaweed ashes) made use
of as manure, may also have their portion of influence. "*

*It is necessary to observe that this experiment has never been actually
tried upon raspberry-plants. "And here," continued Arthur, "is something written with a pencil, on a
slip of paper, and it is Maurice's writing. I will read it to you. "'When I read in this book what is said about the strawberries growing as
large as apricots, after they had been covered over with seaweed, I
thought that perhaps seaweed ashes might be good for my father's
raspberries; and I asked him if he would give me leave to try them. He
gave me leave, and I went directly and gathered together some seaweed
that had been cast on shore; and I dried it, and burned it, and then I
manured the raspberries with it, and the year afterwards the raspberries
grew to the size that you have seen. Now, the reason I tell you this is,
first, that you may know how to manage your raspberries, and next,
because I remember you looked very grave, as if you were not pleased with
my father, Mr. Grant, when he told you that the way by which he came by
his Brobdingnag raspberries was a secret. Perhaps this was the thing
that has made you so angry with us all; for you never have come to see
father since that evening. Now I have told you all I know; and so I hope
you will not be angry with us any longer.'" Mr. Oakly was much pleased by this openness, and said, "Why now, Arthur,
this is something like, this is telling one the thing one wants to know,
without fine speeches. This is like an Englishman more than a Scotchman. Pray, Arthur, do you know whether your friend Maurice was born in England
or in Scotland?" "No, indeed, sir, I don't know--I never asked--I did not think it
signified. All I know is, that wherever he was born, he is VERY good. Look, papa, my tulip is blowing." "Upon my word," said his father, "this will be a beautiful tulip!" "It was given to me by Maurice." "And did you give him nothing for it?" was the father's inquiry. "Nothing in the world; and he gave it to me just at the time when he had
good cause to be angry with me, just when I had broken his bell-glass." "I have a great mind to let you play together again," said Arthur's
father. "Oh, if you would," cried Arthur, clapping his hands, "how happy we
should be! Do you know, father, I have often sat for an hour at a time
up in that crab-tree, looking at Maurice at work in his garden, and
wishing that I was at work with him." Here Arthur was interrupted by the attorney, who came to ask Mr. Oakly
some question about the lawsuit concerning the plum-tree. Oakly showed
him Maurice's letter; and to Arthur's extreme astonishment, the attorney
had no sooner read it, than he exclaimed, "What an artful little
gentleman this is! I never, in the course of all my practice, met with
anything better. Why, this is the most cunning letter I ever read." "Where's the cunning?" said Oakly, and he put on his spectacles. "My good sir, don't you see, that all this stuff about Brobdingnag
raspberries is to ward off your suit about the plum-tree? They know--
that is, Mr. Grant, who is sharp enough, knows--that he will be worsted
in that suit; that he must, in short, pay you a good round sum for
damages, if it goes on--"

"Damages!" said Oakly, staring round him at the plum-tree; "but I don't
know what you mean. I mean nothing but what's honest. I don't mean to
ask for any good round sum; for the plum-tree has done me no great harm
by coming into my garden; but only I don't choose it should come there
without my leave." "Well, well," said the attorney, "I understand all that; but what I want
to make you, Mr. Oakly, understand, is, that this Grant and his son only
want to make up matters with you, and prevent the thing's coming to a
fair trial, by sending on, in this underhand sort of way, a bribe of a
few raspberries." "A bribe!" exclaimed Oakly, "I never took a bribe, and I never will";
and, with sudden indignation, he pulled the raspberry plants from the
ground in which Arthur was planting them; and he threw them over the wall
into Grant's garden. Maurice had put his tulip, which was beginning to blow, in a flower-pot,
on the top of the wall, in hopes that his friend Arthur would see it from
day to day. Alas! he knew not in what a dangerous situation he had
placed it. One of his own Brobdingnag raspberry-plants, swung by the
angry arm of Oakly, struck off the head of his precious tulip! Arthur,
who was full of the thought of convincing his father that the attorney
was mistaken in his judgment of poor Maurice, did not observe the fall of
the tulip. The next day, when Maurice saw his raspberry-plants scattered upon the
ground, and his favourite tulip broken, he was in much astonishment, and,
for some moments, angry; but anger, with him, never lasted long. He was
convinced that all this must be owing to some accident or mistake. He
could not believe that anyone could be so malicious as to injure him on
purpose--"And even if they did all this on purpose to vex me," said he to
himself, "the best thing I can do, is, not to let it vex me. Forgive and
forget." This temper of mind Maurice was more happy in enjoying than he
could have been made, without it, by the possession of all the tulips in
Holland. Tulips were, at this time, things of great consequence in the estimation
of the country several miles round where Maurice and Arthur lived. There
was a florist's feast to be held at the neighbouring town, at which a
prize of a handsome set of gardening-tools was to be given to the person
who could produce the finest flower of its kind. A tulip was the flower
which was thought the finest the preceding year, and consequently numbers
of people afterwards endeavoured to procure tulip-roots, in hopes of
obtaining the prize this year. Arthur's tulip was beautiful. As he
examined it from day to day, and every day thought it improving, he
longed to thank his friend Maurice for it; and he often mounted into his
crab-tree, to look into Maurice's garden, in hopes of seeing his tulip
also in full bloom and beauty. He never could see it. The day of the florist's feast arrived, and Oakly went with his son and
the fine tulip to the place of meeting. It was on a spacious bowling-
green. All the flowers of various sorts were ranged upon a terrace at
the upper end of the bowling-green; and, amongst all this gay variety,
the tulip which Maurice had given to Arthur appeared conspicuously
beautiful. To the owner of this tulip the prize was adjudged; and, as
the handsome garden-tools were delivered to Arthur, he heard a well known
voice wish him joy. He turned, looked about him, and saw his friend
Maurice. "But, Maurice, where is your own tulip?" said Mr. Oakly; "I thought,
Arthur, you told me that he kept one for himself." "So I did," said Maurice; "but somebody (I suppose by accident) broke
it." "Somebody! who?" cried Arthur and Mr. Oakly at once. "Somebody who threw the raspberry-plants back again over the wall,"
replied Maurice. "That was me--that somebody was me," said Oakly. "I scorn to deny it;
but I did not intend to break your tulip, Maurice." "Dear Maurice," said Arthur--"you know I may call him dear Maurice--now
you are by, papa; here are all the garden-tools; take them, and welcome." "Not one of them," said Maurice, drawing back. "Offer them to the father--offer them to Mr. Grant," whispered Oakly;
"he'll take them, I'll answer for it." Mr. Oakly was mistaken:  the father would not accept of the tools. Mr.
Oakly stood surprised--"Certainly," said he to himself, "this cannot be
such a miser as I took him for"; and he walked immediately up to Grant,
and bluntly said to him, "Mr. Grant, your son has behaved very handsomely
to my son; and you seem to be glad of it." "To be sure I am," said Grant

"Which," continued Oakly, "gives me a better opinion of you than ever I
had before--I mean, than ever I had since the day you sent me the shabby
answer about those foolish, what d'ye call em, cursed raspberries." "What shabby answer?" said Grant, with surprise; and Oakly repeated
exactly the message which he received; and Grant declared that he never
sent any such message. He repeated exactly the answer which he really
sent, and Oakly immediately stretched out his hand to him, saying "I
believe you:  no more need be said. I'm only sorry I did not ask you
about this four months ago; and so I should have done if you had not been
a Scotchman. Till now, I never rightly liked a Scotchman. We may thank
this good little fellow," continued he, turning to Maurice, "for our
coming at last to a right understanding. There was no holding out
against his good nature. I'm sure, from the bottom of my heart, I'm
sorry I broke his tulip. Shake hands, boys; I'm glad to see you, Arthur,
look so happy again, and hope Mr. Grant will forgive--"

"Oh, forgive and forget," said Grant and his son at the same moment. And
from this time forward the two families lived in friendship with each
other. Oakly laughed at his own folly, in having been persuaded to go to law
about the plum-tree; and he, in process of time, so completely conquered
his early prejudice against Scotchmen, that he and Grant became partners
in business. Mr. Grant's book-LARNING and knowledge of arithmetic he
found highly useful to him; and he, on his side, possessed a great many
active, good qualities, which became serviceable to his partner. The two boys rejoiced in this family union; and Arthur often declared
that they owed all their happiness to Maurice's favourite maxim, "Forgive
and Forget." WASTE NOT, WANT NOT; or TWO STRINGS TO YOUR BOW. Mr. Gresham, a Bristol merchant, who had, by honourable industry and
economy, accumulated a considerable fortune, retired from business to a
new house which he had built upon the Downs, near Clifton. Mr. Gresham,
however, did not imagine that a new house alone could make him happy. He
did not propose to live in idleness and extravagance; for such a life
would have been equally incompatible with his habits and his principles. He was fond of children; and as he had no sons, he determined to adopt
one of his relations. He had two nephews, and he invited both of them to
his house, that he might have an opportunity of judging of their
dispositions, and of the habits which they had acquired. Hal and Benjamin, Mr. Gresham's nephews, were about ten years old. They
had been educated very differently. Hal was the son of the elder branch
of the family. His father was a gentleman, who spent rather more than he
could afford; and Hal, from the example of the servants in his father's
family, with whom he had passed the first years of his childhood, learned
to waste more of everything than he used. He had been told that
"gentlemen should be above being careful and saving":  and he had
unfortunately imbibed a notion that extravagance was the sign of a
generous disposition, and economy of an avaricious one. Benjamin, on the contrary, had been taught habits of care and foresight. His father had but a very small fortune, and was anxious that his son
should early learn that economy ensures independence, and sometimes puts
it in the power of those who are not very rich to be very generous. The morning after these two boys arrived at their uncle's they were eager
to see all the rooms in the house. Mr. Gresham accompanied them, and
attended to their remarks and exclamations. "Oh! what an excellent motto!" exclaimed Ben, when he read the following
words, which were written in large characters over the chimney-piece, in
his uncle's spacious kitchen--

     "WASTE NOT, WANT NOT." "'Waste not, want not!'" repeated his cousin Hal, in rather a
contemptuous tone; "I think it looks stingy to servants; and no
gentleman's servants, cooks especially, would like to have such a mean
motto always staring them in the face." Ben, who was not so conversant
as his cousin in the ways of cooks and gentlemen's servants, made no
reply to these observations. Mr. Gresham was called away whilst his nephews were looking at the other
rooms in the house. Some time afterwards, he heard their voices in the
hall. "Boys," said he, "what are you doing there?" "Nothing, sir," said Hal; "you were called away from us and we did not
know which way to go." "And have you nothing to do?" said Mr. Gresham. "No, sir, nothing," answered Hal, in a careless tone, like one who was
well content with the state of habitual idleness. "No, sir, nothing!" replied Ben, in a voice of lamentation. "Come," said Mr. Gresham, "if you have nothing to do, lads, will you
unpack those two parcels for me?" The two parcels were exactly alike, both of them well tied up with good
whip cord. Ben took his parcel to a table, and, after breaking off the
sealing wax, began carefully to examine the knot, and then to untie it. Hal stood still, exactly in the spot where the parcel was put into his
hands, and tried first at one corner, and then at another, to pull the
string off by force. "I wish these people wouldn't tie up their parcels
so tight, as if they were never to be undone," cried he, as he tugged at
the cord; and he pulled the knot closer instead of loosening it. "Ben! why, how did you get yours undone, man? what's in your parcel?--I
wonder what is in mine! I wish I could get this string off--I must cut
it." "Oh, no," said Ben, who now had undone the last knot of his parcel, and
who drew out the length of string with exultation, "don't cut it, Hal,--
look what a nice cord this is, and yours is the same:  it's a pity to cut
it; 'WASTE NOT, WANT NOT!' you know." "Pooh!" said Hal, "what signifies a bit of packthread?" "It is whip cord," said Ben. "Well, whip cord! what signifies a bit of whip cord! you can get a bit of
whip cord twice as long as that for twopence; and who cares for twopence! Not I, for one! so here it goes," cried Hal, drawing out his knife; and
he cut the cord, precipitately, in sundry places. "Lads! have you undone the parcels for me?" said Mr. Gresham, opening the
parlour door as he spoke. "Yes, sir," cried Hal; and he dragged off his half cut, half entangled
string--"here's the parcel." "And here's my parcel, uncle; and here's
the string," said Ben. "You may keep the string for your pains," said Mr. Gresham. "Thank you, sir," said Ben:  "what an excellent whip cord it is!" "And you, Hal," continued Mr. Gresham, "you may keep your string too, if
it will be of any use to you." "It will be of no use to me, thank you, sir," said Hal. "No, I am afraid not, if this be it," said his uncle, taking up the
jagged knotted remains of Hal's cord. A few days after this, Mr. Gresham gave to each of his nephews a new top. "But how's this?" said Hal; "these tops have no strings; what shall we do
for strings?" "I have a string that will do very well for mine," said Ben; and he
pulled out of his pocket the fine, long, smooth string, which had tied up
the parcel. With this he soon set up his top, which spun admirably well. "Oh, how I wish I had but a string," said Hal. "What shall I do for a
string? I'll tell you what, I can use the string that goes round my
hat!" "But then," said Ben, "what will you do for a hat-band?" "I'll manage to do without one," said Hal, and he took the string of his
hat for his top. It soon was worn through, and he split his top by
driving the pea too tightly into it. His cousin Ben let him set up his
the next day; but Hal was not more fortunate or more careful when he
meddled with other people's things than when he managed his own. He had
scarcely played half an hour before he split it, by driving the peg too
violently. Ben bore this misfortune with good humour. "Come," said he, "it can't be
helped; but give me the string because THAT may still be of use for
something else." It happened some time afterwards that a lady, who had been intimately
acquainted with Hal's mother at Bath--that is to say, who had frequently
met her at the card-table during the winter--now arrived at Clifton. She
was informed by his mother that Hal was at Mr. Gresham's, and her sons,
who were FRIENDS of his, came to see him, and invited him to spend the
next day with them. Hal joyfully accepted the invitation. He was always glad to go out to
dine, because it gave him something to do, something to think of, or at
least something to say. Besides this, he had been educated to think it
was a fine thing to visit fine people; and Lady Diana Sweepstakes (for
that was the name of his mother's acquaintance) was a very fine lady, and
her two sons intended to be very great gentlemen. He was in a prodigious
hurry when these young gentlemen knocked at his uncle's door the next
day; but just as he got to the hall door, little Patty called to him from
the top of the stairs, and told him that he had dropped his pocket-
handkerchief. "Pick it up, then, and bring it to me, quick, can't you, child," cried
Hal, "for Lady Di's sons are waiting for me?" Little Patty did not know anything about Lady Di's sons; but as she was
very good-natured, and saw that her cousin Hal was, for some reason or
other, in a desperate hurry, she ran downstairs as fast as she possibly
could towards the landing-place, where the handkerchief lay; but, alas! before she reached the handkerchief, she fell, rolling down a whole
flight of stairs, and when her fall was at last stopped by the landing-
place, she did not cry out, she writhed, as if she was in great pain. "Where are you hurt, my love?" said Mr. Gresham, who came instantly, on
hearing the noise of someone falling downstairs. "Where are you hurt, my
dear?" "Here, papa," said the little girl, touching her ankle, which she had
decently covered with her gown. "I believe I am hurt here, but not
much," added she, trying to rise; "only it hurts me when I move." "I'll carry you; don't move then," said her father, and he took her up in
his arms. "My shoe! I've lost one of my shoes," said she. Ben looked for it upon the stairs, and he found it sticking in a loop of
whip cord, which was entangled round one of the bannisters. When this
cord was drawn forth, it appeared that it was the very same jagged,
entangled piece which Hal had pulled off his parcel. He had diverted
himself with running up and downstairs, whipping the bannisters with it,
as he thought he could convert it to no better use; and, with his usual
carelessness, he at last left it hanging just where he happened to throw
it when the dinner bell rang. Poor little Patty's ankle was terribly
strained, and Hal reproached himself for his folly, and would have
reproached himself longer, perhaps, if Lady Di Sweepstakes' sons had not
hurried him away. In the evening, Patty could not run about as she used to do; but she sat
upon the sofa, and she said, that she did not feel the pain of her ankle
SO MUCH, whilst Ben was so good as to play at JACK STRAWS with her. "That's right, Ben; never be ashamed of being good-natured to those who
are younger and weaker than yourself," said his uncle, smiling at seeing
him produce his whip cord, to indulge his little cousin with a game at
her favourite cat's cradle. "I shall not think you one bit less manly,
because I see you playing at cat's cradle with a little child of six
years old." Hal, however, was not precisely of his uncle's opinion:  for when he
returned in the evening, and saw Ben playing with his little cousin, he
could not help smiling contemptuously, and asked if he had been playing
at cat's cradle all night. In a heedless manner he made some inquiries
after Patty's sprained ankle, and then he ran on to tell all the news he
had heard at Lady Diana Sweepstakes'--news which he thought would make
him appear a person of vast importance. "Do you know, uncle--do you know, Ben," said he--"there's to be the most
FAMOUS doings that ever were heard of upon the Downs here, the first day
of next month, which will be in a fortnight, thank my stars! I wish the
fortnight was over; I shall think of nothing else, I know, till that
happy day comes!" Mr. Gresham inquired why the first of September was to be so much happier
than any other day in the year. "Why," replied Hal, "Lady Diana Sweepstakes, you know, is a famous rider,
and archer, and ALL THAT--"

"Very likely," said Mr. Gresham, soberly; "but what then?" "Dear uncle!" cried Hal, "but you shall hear. There's to be a race upon
the Downs on the first of September, and after the race, there's to be an
archery meeting for the ladies, and Lady Diana Sweepstakes is to be one
of THEM. And after the ladies have done shooting--now, Ben, comes the
best part of it! we boys are to have our turn, and Lady Di is to give a
prize to the best marksman amongst us, of a very handsome bow and arrow! Do you know, I've been practising already, and I'll show you, to-morrow,
as soon as it comes home, the FAMOUS bow and arrow that Lady Diana has
given me; but, perhaps," added he, with a scornful laugh, "you like a
cat's cradle better than a bow and arrow." Ben made no reply to this taunt at the moment; but the next day, when
Hal's new bow and arrow came home, he convinced him that he knew how to
use it very well. "Ben," said his uncle, "you seem to be a good marksman, though you have
not boasted of yourself. I'll give you a bow and arrow, and, perhaps, if
you practise, you may make yourself an archer before the first of
September; and, in the meantime, you will not wish the fortnight to be
over, for you will have something to do." "Oh, sir," interrupted Hal, "but if you mean that Ben should put in for
the prize, he must have a uniform." "Why MUST he?" said Mr. Gresham. "Why, sir, because everybody has--I mean everybody that's anybody; and
Lady Diana was talking about the uniform all dinner time, and it's
settled, all about it, except the buttons:  the young Sweepstakes are to
get theirs made first for patterns--they are to be white, faced with
green, and they'll look very handsome, I'm sure; and I shall write to
mamma to-night, as Lady Diana bid me, about mine; and I shall tell her to
be sure to answer my letter, without fail, by return of post; and then,
if mamma makes no objection, which I know she won't, because she never
thinks much about expense, and ALL THAT--then I shall bespeak my uniform,
and get it made by the same tailor that makes for Lady Diana and the
young Sweepstakes." "Mercy upon us!" said Mr. Gresham, who was almost stunned by the rapid
vociferation with which this long speech about a uniform was pronounced. "I don't pretend to understand these things," added he, with an air of
simplicity; "but we will inquire, Ben, into the necessity of the case;
and if it is necessary--or, if you think it necessary, that you shall
have a uniform--why, I'll give you one." "YOU, uncle? Will you, INDEED?" exclaimed Hal, with amazement painted in
his countenance. "Well, that's the last thing in the world I should have
expected! You are not at all the sort of person I should have thought
would care about a uniform; and now I should have supposed you'd have
thought it extravagant to have a coat on purpose only for one day; and
I'm sure Lady Diana Sweepstakes thought as I do; for when I told her of
that motto over your kitchen chimney, 'WASTE NOT, WANT NOT,' she laughed,
and said that I had better not talk to you about uniforms, and that my
mother was the proper person to write to about my uniform:  but I'll tell
Lady Diana, uncle, how good you are, and how much she was mistaken." "Take care how you do that," said Mr. Gresham:  "for perhaps the lady was
not mistaken." "Nay, did not you say, just now, you would give poor Ben a uniform?" "I said I would, if he thought it necessary to have one." "Oh, I'll answer for it, he'll think it necessary, " said Hal, laughing,
"because it is necessary." "Allow him, at least, to judge for himself," said Mr. Gresham. "My dear uncle, but I assure you," said Hal, earnestly, "there's no
judging about the matter, because really, upon my word, Lady Diana said
distinctly, that her sons were to have uniforms, white faced with green,
and a green and white cockade in their hats." "May be so," said Mr. Gresham, still with the same look of calm
simplicity; "put on your hats, boys, and come with me. I know a
gentleman whose sons are to be at this archery meeting, and we will
inquire into all the particulars from him. Then, after we have seen him
(it is not eleven o'clock yet) we shall have time enough to walk on to
Bristol, and choose the cloth for Ben's uniform, if it is necessary." "I cannot tell what to make of all he says," whispered Hal, as he reached
down his hat; "do you think, Ben, he means to give you this uniform, or
not?" "I think," said Ben, "that he means to give me one, if it is necessary;
or, as he said, if I think it is necessary." "And that to be sure you will; won't you? or else you'll be a great fool,
I know, after all I've told you. How can anyone in the world know so
much about the matter as I, who have dined with Lady Diana Sweepstakes
but yesterday, and heard all about it from beginning to end? And as for
this gentleman that we are going to, I'm sure, if he knows anything about
the matter, he'll say exactly the same as I do." "We shall hear," said Ben, with a degree of composure which Hal could by
no means comprehend when a uniform was in question. The gentleman upon whom Mr. Gresham called had three sons, who were all
to be at this archery meeting; and they unanimously assured him, in the
presence of Hal and Ben, that they had never thought of buying uniforms
for this grand occasion, and that, amongst the number of their
acquaintance, they knew of but three boys whose friends intended to be at
such an UNNECESSARY expense. Hal stood amazed. "Such are the varieties of opinion upon all the grand affairs of life,"
said Mr. Gresham, looking at his nephews. "What amongst one set of
people you hear asserted to be absolutely necessary, you will hear from
another set of people is quite unnecessary. All that can be done, my
dear boys, in these difficult cases, is to judge for yourselves, which
opinions, and which people, are the most reasonable." Hal, who had been more accustomed to think of what was fashionable, than
of what was reasonable, without at all considering the good sense of what
his uncle said to him, replied, with childish petulance, "Indeed, sir, I
don't know what other people think; but I only know what Lady Diana
Sweepstakes said." The name of Lady Diana Sweepstakes, Hal thought, must
impress all present with respect; he was highly astonished, when, as he
looked round, he saw a smile of contempt upon everyone's countenance:
and he was yet further bewildered, when he heard her spoken of as a very
silly, extravagant, ridiculous woman, whose opinion no prudent person
would ask upon any subject, and whose example was to be shunned, instead
of being imitated. "Ay, my dear Hal," said his uncle, smiling at his look of amazement,
"these are some of the things that young people must learn from
experience. All the world do not agree in opinion about characters:  you
will hear the same person admired in one company, and blamed in another;
so that we must still come round to the same point, 'Judge for
yourself.'" Hal's thoughts were, however, at present too full of the uniform to allow
his judgment to act with perfect impartiality. As soon as their visit
was over, and all the time they walked down the hill from Prince's
Building's towards Bristol, he continued to repeat nearly the same
arguments, which he had formerly used, respecting necessity, the uniform,
and Lady Diana Sweepstakes. To all this Mr. Gresham made no reply, and
longer had the young gentleman expatiated upon the subject, which had so
strongly seized upon his imagination, had not his senses been forcibly
assailed at this instant by the delicious odours and tempting sight of
certain cakes and jellies in a pastrycook's shop. "Oh, uncle," said he,
as his uncle was going to turn the corner to pursue the road to Bristol,
"look at those jellies!" pointing to a confectioner's shop. "I must buy
some of those good things, for I have got some halfpence in my pocket." "Your having halfpence in your pocket is an excellent reason for eating,"
said Mr. Gresham, smiling. "But I really am hungry," said Hal; "you know, uncle, it is a good while
since breakfast." His uncle, who was desirous to see his nephews act without restraint,
that he might judge their characters, bid them do as they pleased. "Come, then, Ben, if you've any halfpence in your pocket." "I'm not hungry," said Ben. "I suppose THAT means that you've no halfpence," said Hal, laughing, with
the look of superiority which he had been taught to think the RICH might
assume towards those who were convicted either of poverty or economy. "Waste not, want not," said Ben to himself. Contrary to his cousin's
surmise, he happened to have two pennyworth of halfpence actually in his
pocket. At the very moment Hal stepped into the pastrycook's shop, a poor,
industrious man, with a wooden leg, who usually sweeps the dirty corner
of the walk which turns at this spot to the Wells, held his hat to Ben,
who, after glancing his eye at the petitioner's well worn broom,
instantly produced his twopence. "I wish I had more halfpence for you,
my good man," said he; "but I've only twopence." Hal came out of Mr. Millar's, the confectioner's shop, with a hatful of
cakes in his hand. Mr. Millar's dog was sitting on the flags before the
door, and he looked up with a wistful, begging eye at Hal, who was eating
a queen cake. Hal, who was wasteful even in his good-nature, threw a
whole queen cake to the dog, who swallowed it for a single mouthful. "There goes twopence in the form of a queen cake," said Mr. Gresham. Hal next offered some of his cakes to his uncle and cousin; but they
thanked him, and refused to eat any, because, they said, they were not
hungry; so he ate and ate as he walked along, till at last he stopped,
and said, "This bun tastes so bad after the queen cakes, I can't bear
it!" and he was going to fling it from him into the river. "Oh, it is a pity to waste that good bun; we may be glad of it yet," said
Ben; "give it me rather than throw it away." "Why, I thought you said you were not hungry," said Hal. "True, I am not hungry now; but that is no reason why I should never be
hungry again." "Well, there is the cake for you. Take it; for it has made me sick, and
I don't care what becomes of it." Ben folded the refuse bit of his cousin's bun in a piece of paper, and
put it into his pocket. "I'm beginning to be exceeding tired or sick or something," said Hal;
"and as there is a stand of coaches somewhere hereabouts, had not we
better take a coach, instead of walking all the way to Bristol?" "For a stout archer," said Mr. Gresham, "you are more easily tired than
one might have expected. However, with all my heart, let us take a
coach, for Ben asked me to show him the cathedral yesterday; and I
believe I should find it rather too much for me to walk so far, though I
am not sick with eating good things." "THE CATHEDRAL!" said Hal, after he had been seated in the coach about a
quarter of an hour, and had somewhat recovered from his sickness--"the
cathedral! Why, are we only going to Bristol to see the cathedral? I
thought we came out to see about a uniform." There was a dulness and melancholy kind of stupidity in Hal's countenance
as he pronounced these words, like one wakening from a dream, which made
both his uncle and his cousin burst out a-laughing. "Why," said Hal, who was now piqued, "I'm sure you did say, uncle, you
would go to Mr. Hall's to choose the cloth for the uniform." "Very true, and so I will," said Mr. Gresham; "but we need not make a
whole morning's work, need we, of looking at a piece of cloth? Cannot we
see a uniform and a cathedral both in one morning?" They went first to the cathedral. Hal's head was too full of the uniform
to take any notice of the painted window, which immediately caught Ben's
embarrassed attention. He looked at the large stained figures on the
Gothic window, and he observed their coloured shadows on the floor and
walls. Mr. Gresham, who perceived that he was eager on all subjects to gain
information, took this opportunity of telling him several things about
the lost art of painting on glass, Gothic arches, etc., which Hal thought
extremely tiresome. "Come! come! we shall be late indeed," said Hal; "surely you've looked
long enough, Ben, at this blue and red window." "I'm only thinking about these coloured shadows," said Ben. "I can show you when we go home, Ben," said his uncle, "an entertaining
paper upon such shadows. "*

*Vide "Priestley's History of Vision," chapter on coloured shadows. "Hark!" cried Ben, "did you hear that noise?" They all listened; and
they heard a bird singing in the cathedral. "It's our old robin, sir," said the lad who had opened the cathedral door
for them. "Yes," said Mr. Gresham, "there he is, boys--look--perched upon the
organ; he often sits there, and sings, whilst the organ is playing." "And," continued the lad who showed the cathedral, "he has lived here
these many, many winters. They say he is fifteen years old; and he is so
tame, poor fellow! that if I had a bit of bread he'd come down and feed
in my hand." "I've a bit of bun here," cried Ben, joyfully, producing the remains of
the bun which Hal but an hour before would have thrown away. "Pray, let
us see the poor robin eat out of your hand." The lad crumbled the bun, and called to the robin, who fluttered and
chirped, and seemed rejoiced at the sight of the bread; but yet he did
not come down from his pinnacle on the organ. "He is afraid of US," said Ben; "he is not used to eat before strangers,
I suppose." "Ah, no, sir," said the young man, with a deep sigh, "that is not the
thing. He is used enough to eat afore company. Time was he'd have come
down for me before ever so many fine folks, and have eat his crumbs out
of my hand, at my first call; but, poor fellow! it's not his fault now. He does not know me now, sir, since my accident, because of this great
black patch." The young man put his hand to his right eye, which was
covered with a huge black patch. Ben asked what ACCIDENT he meant; and
the lad told him that, but a few weeks ago, he had lost the sight of his
eye by the stroke of a stone, which reached him as he was passing under
the rocks at Clifton unluckily when the workmen were blasting. "I don't
mind so much for myself, sir," said the lad; "but I can't work so well
now, as I used to do before my accident, for my old mother, who has had a
STROKE of the palsy; and I've a many little brothers and sisters not well
able yet to get their own livelihood, though they be as willing as
willing can be." "Where does your mother live?" said Mr. Gresham. "Hard by, sir, just close to the church here:  it was HER that always had
the showing of it to strangers, till she lost the use of her poor limbs." "Shall we, may we, uncle, go that way? This is the house; is not it?" said Ben, when they went out of the cathedral. They went into the house; it was rather a hovel than a house; but, poor
as it was, it was as neat as misery could make it. The old woman was
sitting up in her wretched bed, winding worsted; four meagre, ill-
clothed, pale children were all busy, some of them sticking pins in paper
for the pin-maker, and others sorting rags for the paper-maker. "What a horrid place it is!" said Hal, sighing; "I did not know there
were such shocking places in the world. I've often seen terrible-
looking, tumble-down places, as we drove through the town in mamma's
carriage; but then I did not know who lived in them; and I never saw the
inside of any of them. It is very dreadful, indeed, to think that people
are forced to live in this way. I wish mamma would send me some more
pocket-money, that I might do something for them. I had half a crown;
but," continued he, feeling in his pockets, "I'm afraid I spent the last
shilling of it this morning upon those cakes that made me sick. I wish I
had my shilling now, I'd give it to these poor people." Ben, though he was all this time silent, was as sorry as his talkative
cousin for all these poor people. But there was some difference between
the sorrow of these two boys. Hal, after he was again seated in the hackney-coach, and had rattled
through the busy streets of Bristol, for a few minutes quite forgot the
spectacle of misery which he had seen; and the gay shops in Wine Street
and the idea of his green and white uniform wholly occupied his
imagination. "Now for our uniforms!" cried he, as he jumped eagerly out of the coach,
when his uncle stopped at the woollen-draper's door. "Uncle," said Ben, stopping Mr. Gresham before he got out of the
carriage, "I don't think a uniform is at all necessary for me. I'm very
much obliged to you; but I would rather not have one. I have a very good
coat, and I think it would be waste." "Well, let me get out of the carriage, and we will see about it," said
Mr. Gresham; "perhaps the sight of the beautiful green and white cloth,
and the epaulettes (have you ever considered the epaulettes?) may tempt
you to change your mind." "Oh, no," said Ben, laughing; "I shall not change my mind,"

The green cloth, and the white cloth, and the epaulettes were produced,
to Hal's infinite satisfaction. His uncle took up a pen, and calculated
for a few minutes; then, showing the back of the letter, upon which he
was writing, to his nephews, "Cast up these sums, boys," said he, "and
tell me whether I am right." "Ben, do you do it," said Hal, a little embarrassed; "I am not quick at
figures." Ben WAS, and he went over his uncle's calculation very
expeditiously. "It is right, is it?" said Mr. Gresham. "Yes, sir, quite right." "Then, by this calculation, I find I could, for less than half the money
your uniforms would cost, purchase for each of you boys a warm great-
coat, which you will want, I have a notion, this winter upon the Downs." "Oh, sir," said Hal, with an alarmed look; "but it is not winter YET; it
is not cold weather YET. We sha'n't want greatcoats YET." "Don't you remember how cold we were, Hal, the day before yesterday, in
that sharp wind, when we were flying our kite upon the Downs? and winter
will come, though it is not come yet--I am sure, I should like to have a
good warm great-coat very much." Mr. Gresham took six guineas out of his purse and he placed three of them
before Hal, and three before Ben. "Young gentlemen," said he, "I believe
your uniforms would come to about three guineas a piece. Now I will lay
out this money for you just as you please. Hal, what say you?" "Why, sir," said Hal, "a great-coat is a good thing, to be sure; and
then, after the great-coat, as you said it would only cost half as much
as the uniform, there would be some money to spare, would not there?" "Yes, my dear, about five-and-twenty shillings." "Five-and-twenty shillings?--I could buy and do a great many things, to
be sure, with five-and-twenty shillings; but then, THE THING IS, I must
go without the uniform, if I have the great-coat." "Certainly," said his uncle. "Ah!" said Hal, sighing, as he looked at the epaulettes, "uncle, if you
would not be displeased, if I choose the uniform--"

"I shall not be displeased at your choosing whatever you like best," said
Mr. Gresham. "Well, then, thank you, sir," said Hal; "I think I had better have the
uniform, because, if I have not the uniform, now, directly, it will be of
no use to me, as the archery meeting is the week after next, you know;
and, as to the great-coat, perhaps between this time and the VERY cold
weather, which, perhaps, won't be till Christmas, papa will buy a great-
coat for me; and I'll ask mamma to give me some pocket money to give
away, and she will, perhaps." To all this conclusive, conditional
reasoning, which depended upon the word PERHAPS, three times repeated,
Mr. Gresham made no reply; but he immediately bought the uniform for Hal,
and desired that it should be sent to Lady Diana Sweepstakes' son's
tailor, to be made up. The measure of Hal's happiness was now complete. "And how am I to lay out the three guineas for you, Ben?" said Mr.
Gresham; "speak, what do you wish for first?" "A great-coat, uncle, if you please." Gresham bought the coat; and,
after it was paid for, five-and-twenty shillings of Ben's three guineas
remained. "What next, my boy?" said his uncle. "Arrows, uncle, if you please; three arrows." "My dear, I promised you a bow and arrows." "No, uncle, you only said a bow." "Well, I meant a bow and arrows. I'm glad you are so exact, however. It
is better to claim less than more than what is promised. The three
arrows you shall have. But go on; how shall I dispose of these five-and-
twenty shillings for you?" "In clothes, if you will be so good, uncle, for that poor boy who has the
great black patch on his eye." "I always believed," said Mr. Gresham, shaking hands with Ben, "that
economy and generosity were the best friends, instead of being enemies,
as some silly, extravagant people would have us think them. Choose the
poor, blind boy's coat, my dear nephew, and pay for it. There's no
occasion for my praising you about the matter. Your best reward is in
your own mind, child; and you want no other, or I'm mistaken. Now, jump
into the coach, boys, and let's be off. We shall be late, I'm afraid,"
continued he, as the coach drove on:  "but I must let you stop, Ben, with
your goods, at the poor boy's door." When they came to the house, Mr. Gresham opened the coach door, and Ben
jumped out with his parcel under his arm. "Stay, stay! you must take me with you," said his pleased uncle; "I like
to see people made happy, as well as you do." "And so do I, too," said Hal; "let me come with you. I almost wish my
uniform was not gone to the tailor's, so I do." And when he saw the look
of delight and gratitude with which the poor boy received the clothes
which Ben gave him; and when he heard the mother and children thank him,
he sighed, and said, "Well, I hope mamma will give me some more pocket
money soon." Upon his return home, however, the sight of the FAMOUS bow and arrow,
which Lady Diana Sweepstakes had sent him, recalled to his imagination
all the joys of his green and white uniform; and he no longer wished that
it had not been sent to the tailor's. "But I don't understand, Cousin Hal," said little Patty, "why you call
this bow a FAMOUS bow. You say famous very often; and I don't know
exactly what it means; a famous uniform--famous doings. I remember you
said there are to be famous doings, the first of September, upon the
Downs. What does famous mean?" "Oh, why, famous means--now, don't you know what famous means? It means-
-it is a word that people say--it is the fashion to say it--it means--it
means famous." Patty laughed, and said, "This does not explain it to
me." "No," said Hal, "nor can it be explained:  if you don't understand it,
that's not my fault. Everybody but little children, I suppose,
understands it; but there's no explaining THOSE SORT of words, if you
don't TAKE THEM at once. There's to be famous doings upon the Downs, the
first of September; that is grand, fine. In short, what does it signify
talking any longer, Patty, about the matter? Give me my bow, for I must
go out upon the Downs and practise." Ben accompanied him with the bow and the three arrows which his uncle had
now given to him; and, every day, these two boys went out upon the Downs
and practised shooting with indefatigable perseverance. Where equal
pains are taken, success is usually found to be pretty nearly equal. Our
two archers, by constant practice, became expert marksmen; and before the
day of trial, they were so exactly matched in point of dexterity, that it
was scarcely possible to decide which was superior. The long expected lst of September at length arrived. "What sort of a
day is it?" was the first question that was asked by Hal and Ben the
moment that they wakened. The sun shone bright, but there was a sharp
and high wind. "Ha!" said Ben, "I shall be glad of my good great-coat
to-day; for I've a notion it will be rather cold upon the Downs,
especially when we are standing still, as we must, whilst all the people
are shooting." "Oh, never mind! I don't think I shall feel it cold at all," said Hal,
as he dressed himself in his new green and white uniform; and he viewed
himself with much complacency. "Good morning to you, uncle; how do you do?" said he, in a voice of
exultation, when he entered the breakfast-room. How do you do? seemed
rather to mean, "How do you like me in my uniform?" And his uncle's
cool, "Very well, I thank you, Hal," disappointed him, as it seemed only
to say, "Your uniform makes no difference in my opinion of you." Even little Patty went on eating her breakfast much as usual, and talked
of the pleasure of walking with her father to the Downs, and of all the
little things which interested her; so that Hal's epaulettes were not the
principal object in anyone's imagination but his own. "Papa," said Patty, "as we go up the hill where there is so much red mud,
I must take care to pick my way nicely; and I must hold up my frock, as
you desired me, and, perhaps, you will be so good, if I am not
troublesome, to lift me over the very bad place where are no stepping-
stones. My ankle is entirely well, and I'm glad of that, or else I
should not be able to walk so far as the Downs. How good you were to me,
Ben, when I was in pain the day I sprained my ankle! You played at jack
straws and at cat's-cradle with me. Oh, that puts me in mind--here are
your gloves which I asked you that night to let me mend. I've been a
great while about them; but are not they not very neatly mended, papa? Look at the sewing." "I am not a very good judge of sewing, my dear little girl," said Mr.
Gresham, examining the work with a close and scrupulous eye; "but, in my
opinion, here is one stitch that is rather too long. The white teeth are
not quite even." "Oh, papa, I'll take out that long tooth in a minute," said Patty,
laughing; "I did not think that you would observe it so soon." "I would not have you trust to my blindness," said her father, stroking
her head, fondly; "I observe everything. I observe, for instance, that
you are a grateful little girl, and that you are glad to be of use to
those who have been kind to you; and for this I forgive you the long
stitch." "But it's out, it's out, papa," said Patty; "and the next time your
gloves want mending, Ben, I'll mend them better." "They are very nice, I think," said Ben, drawing them on; "and I am much
obliged to you. I was just wishing I had a pair of gloves to keep my
fingers warm to-day, for I never can shoot well when my hands are
benumbed. Look, Hal; you know how ragged these gloves were; you said
they were good for nothing but to throw away; now look, there's not a
hole in them," said he, spreading his fingers. "Now, is it not very extraordinary," said Hal to himself, "that they
should go on so long talking about an old pair of gloves, without saying
scarcely a word about my new uniform? Well, the young Sweepstakes and
Lady Diana will talk enough about it; that's one comfort. Is not it time
to think of setting out, sir?" said Hal to his uncle. "The company, you
know, are to meet at the Ostrich at twelve, and the race to begin at one,
and Lady Diana's horses, I know were ordered to be at the door at ten." Mr. Stephen, the butler, here interrupted the hurrying young gentleman in
his calculations. "There's a poor lad, sir, below, with a great black
patch on his right eye, who is come from Bristol, and wants to speak a
word with the young gentlemen, if you please. I told him they were just
going out with you; but he says he won't detain them more than half a
minute." "Show him up, show him up," said Mr. Gresham. "But, I suppose," said Hal, with a sigh, "that Stephen mistook, when he
said the young GENTLEMEN; he only wants to see Ben, I daresay; I'm sure
he has no reason to want to see me." "Here he comes--Oh, Ben, he is dressed in the new coat you gave him,"
whispered Hal, who was really a good-natured boy, though extravagant. "How much better he looks than he did in the ragged coat! Ah! he looked
at you first, Ben--and well he may!" The boy bowed, without any cringing servility, but with an open, decent
freedom in his manner, which expressed that he had been obliged, but that
he knew his young benefactor was not thinking of the obligation. He made
as little distinction as possible between his bows to the two cousins. "As I was sent with a message, by the clerk of our parish, to Redland
chapel out on the Downs, to-day, sir," said he to Mr. Gresham, "knowing
your house lay in my way, my mother, sir, bid me call, and make bold to
offer the young gentlemen two little worsted balls that she has worked
for them," continued the lad, pulling out of his pocket two worsted balls
worked in green and orange-coloured stripes. "They are but poor things,
sir, she bid me say, to look at; but, considering she has but one hand to
work with, and that her left hand, you'll not despise 'em, we hopes." He
held the balls to Ben and Hal. "They are both alike, gentlemen," said
he. "If you'll be pleased to take 'em they're better than they look, for
they bound higher than your head. I cut the cork round for the inside
myself, which was all I could do." "They are nice balls, indeed:  we are much obliged to you," said the boys
as they received them, and they proved them immediately. The balls
struck the floor with a delightful sound, and rebounded higher than Mr.
Gresham's head. Little Patty clapped her hands joyfully. But now a
thundering double rap at the door was heard. "The Master Sweepstakes, sir," said Stephen, "are come for Master Hal. They say that all the young gentlemen who have archery uniforms are to
walk together, in a body, I think they say, sir; and they are to parade
along the Well Walk, they desired me to say, sir, with a drum and fife,
and so up the hill by Prince's Place, and all to go upon the Downs
together, to the place of meeting. I am not sure I'm right, sir; for
both the young gentlemen spoke at once, and the wind is very high at the
street door; so that I could not well make out all they said; but I
believe this is the sense of it." "Yes, yes," said Hal, eagerly, "it's all right. I know that is just what
was settled the day I dined at Lady Diana's; and Lady Diana and a great
party of gentlemen are to ride--"

"Well, that is nothing to the purpose," interrupted Mr. Gresham. "Don't
keep these Master Sweepstakes waiting. Decide--do you choose to go with
them or with us?" "Sir--uncle--sir, you know, since all the UNIFORMS agreed to go together-
-"

"Off with you, then, Mr. Uniform, if you mean to go," said Mr. Gresham. Hal ran downstairs in such a hurry that he forgot his bow and arrows. Ben discovered this when he went to fetch his own; and the lad from
Bristol, who had been ordered by Mr. Gresham to eat his breakfast before
he proceeded to Redland Chapel, heard Ben talking about his cousin's bow
and arrows. "I know," said Ben, "he will be sorry not to have his bow
with him, because here are the green knots tied to it, to match his
cockade:  and he said that the boys were all to carry their bows, as part
of the show." "If you'll give me leave, sir," said the poor Bristol lad, "I shall have
plenty of time; and I'll run down to the Well Walk after the young
gentleman, and take him his bow and arrows." "Will you? I shall be much obliged to you," said Ben; and away went the
boy with the bow that was ornamented with green ribands. The public walk leading to the Wells was full of company. The windows of
all the houses in St. Vincent's Parade were crowded with well dressed
ladies, who were looking out in expectation of the archery procession. Parties of gentlemen and ladies, and a motley crowd of spectators, were
seen moving backwards and forwards, under the rocks, on the opposite side
of the water. A barge, with coloured streamers flying, was waiting to
take up a party who were going upon the water. The bargemen rested upon
their oars, and gazed with broad faces of curiosity upon the busy scene
that appeared upon the public walk. The archers and archeresses were now drawn up on the flags under the
semicircular piazza just before Mrs. Yearsley's library. A little band
of children, who had been mustered by Lady Diana Sweepstakes' SPIRITED
EXERTIONS, closed the procession. They were now all in readiness. The
drummer only waited for her ladyship's signal; and the archers' corps
only waited for her ladyship's word of command to march. "Where are your bow and arrows, my little man?" said her ladyship to Hal,
as she reviewed her Lilliputian regiment. "You can't march, man, without
your arms?" Hal had despatched a messenger for his forgotten bow, but the messenger
returned not. He looked from side to side in great distress--"Oh,
there's my bow coming, I declare!" cried he; "look, I see the bow and the
ribands. Look now, between the trees, Charles Sweepstakes, on the
Hotwell Walk; it is coming!" "But you've kept us all waiting a confounded time," said his impatient
friend. "It is that good-natured poor fellow from Bristol, I protest, that has
brought it me; I'm sure I don't deserve it from him," said Hal, to
himself, when he saw the lad with the black patch on his eye running,
quite out of breath, towards him, with his bow and arrows. "Fall back, my good friend--fall back," said the military lady, as soon
as he had delivered the bow to Hal; "I mean, stand out of the way, for
your great patch cuts no figure amongst us. Don't follow so close, now,
as if you belonged to us, pray." The poor boy had no ambition to partake the triumph; he FELL BACK as soon
as he understood the meaning of the lady's words. The drum beat, the
fife played, the archers marched, the spectators admired. Hal stepped
proudly, and felt as if the eyes of the whole universe were upon his
epaulettes, or upon the facings of his uniform; whilst all the time he
was considered only as part of a show. The walk appeared much shorter than usual, and he was extremely sorry
that Lady Diana, when they were half-way up the hill leading to Prince's
Place, mounted her horse, because the road was dirty, and all the
gentlemen and ladies who accompanied her followed her example. "We can leave the children to walk, you know," said she to the gentleman
who helped her to mount her horse. "I must call to some of them, though,
and leave orders where they are to join." She beckoned:  and Hal, who was foremost, and proud to show his alacrity,
ran on to receive her ladyship's orders. Now, as we have before
observed, it was a sharp and windy day; and though Lady Diana Sweepstakes
was actually speaking to him, and looking at him, he could not prevent
his nose from wanting to be blowed:  he pulled out his handkerchief and
out rolled the new ball which had been given to him just before he left
home, and which, according to his usual careless habits, he had stuffed
into his pockets in his hurry. "Oh, my new ball!" cried he, as he ran
after it. As he stopped to pick it up, he let go his hat, which he had
hitherto held on with anxious care; for the hat, though it had a fine
green and white cockade, had no band or string round it. The string, as
we may recollect, our wasteful hero had used in spinning his top. The
hat was too large for his head without this band; a sudden gust of wind
blew it off. Lady Diana's horse started and reared. She was a FAMOUS
horse woman, and sat him to the admiration of all beholders; but there
was a puddle of red clay and water in this spot, and her ladyship's
uniform habit was a sufferer by the accident. "Careless brat!" said she,
"why can't he keep his hat upon his head?" In the meantime, the wind
blew the hat down the hill, and Hal ran after it amidst the laughter of
his kind friends, the young Sweepstakes, and the rest of the little
regiment. The hat was lodged, at length, upon a bank. Hal pursued it:
he thought this bank was hard, but, alas! the moment he set his foot upon
it the foot sank. He tried to draw it back; his other foot slipped, and
he fell prostrate, in his green and white uniform, into the treacherous
bed of red mud. His companions, who had halted upon the top of the hill,
stood laughing, spectators of his misfortune. It happened that the poor boy with the black patch upon his eye, who had
been ordered by Lady Diana to "fall back" and to "keep at a distance,"
was now coming up the hill; and the moment he saw our fallen hero, he
hastened to his assistance. He dragged poor Hal, who was a deplorable
spectacle, out of the red mud. The obliging mistress of a lodging house,
as soon as she understood that the young gentleman was nephew to Mr.
Gresham, to whom she had formerly let her house, received Hal, covered as
he was with dirt. The poor Bristol lad hastened to Mr. Gresham's for clean stockings and
shoes for Hal. He was unwilling to give up his uniform:  it was rubbed
and rubbed, and a spot here and there was washed out; and he kept
continually repeating,--"When it's dry it will all brush off--when it's
dry it will all brush off, won't it?" But soon the fear of being too
late at the archery meeting began to balance the dread of appearing in
his stained habiliments; and he now as anxiously repeated, whilst the
woman held the wet coat to the fire, "Oh, I shall be too late; indeed, I
shall be too late; make haste; it will never dry; hold it nearer--nearer
to the fire. I shall lose my turn to shoot; oh, give me the coat; I
don't mind how it is, if I can but get it on." Holding it nearer and nearer to the fire dried it quickly, to be sure;
but it shrunk it also, so that it was no easy matter to get the coat on
again. However, Hal, who did not see the red splashes, which, in spite
of all these operations, were too visible upon his shoulders, and upon
the skirts of his white coat behind, was pretty well satisfied to observe
that there was not one spot upon the facings. "Nobody," said he, "will
take notice of my coat behind, I daresay. I think it looks as smart
almost as ever!" --and under this persuasion our young archer resumed his
bow--his bow with green ribands, now no more!--and he pursued his way to
the Downs. All his companions were far out of sight. "I suppose," said he to his
friend with the black patch--"I suppose my uncle and Ben had left home
before you went for the shoes and stockings for me?" "Oh, yes, sir; the butler said they had been gone to the Downs a matter
of a good half-hour or more." Hal trudged on as fast as he possibly could. When he got upon the Downs,
he saw numbers of carriages, and crowds of people, all going towards the
place of meeting at the Ostrich. He pressed forwards. He was at first
so much afraid of being late, that he did not take notice of the mirth
his motley appearance excited in all beholders. At length he reached the
appointed spot. There was a great crowd of people. In the midst he
heard Lady Diana's loud voice betting upon someone who was just going to
shoot at the mark. "So then the shooting is begun, is it?" said Hal. "Oh, let me in! pray
let me into the circle! I'm one of the archers--I am, indeed; don't you
see my green and white uniform?" "Your red and white uniform, you mean," said the man to whom he addressed
himself; and the people, as they opened a passage for him, could not
refrain laughing at the mixture of dirt and finery which it exhibited. In vain, when he got into the midst of the formidable circle, he looked
to his friends, the young Sweepstakes, for their countenance and support. They were amongst the most unmerciful of the laughers. Lady Diana also
seemed more to enjoy than to pity his confusion. "Why could you not keep your hat upon your head, man?" said she, in her
masculine tone. "You have been almost the ruin of my poor uniform habit;
but I've escaped rather better than you have. Don't stand there, in the
middle of the circle, or you'll have an arrow in your eyes just now, I've
a notion." Hal looked round in search of better friends. "Oh, where's my uncle?--
where's Ben?" said he. He was in such confusion, that, amongst the
number of faces, he could scarcely distinguish one from another; but he
felt somebody at this moment pull his elbow, and, to his great relief, he
heard the friendly voice, and saw the good natured face of his Cousin
Ben. "Come back; come behind these people," said Ben, "and put on my great-
coat; here it is for you." Right glad was Hal to cover his disgraced uniform with the rough great-
coat which he had formerly despised. He pulled the stained, drooping
cockade out of his unfortunate hat; and he was now sufficiently recovered
from his vexation to give an intelligible account of his accident to his
uncle and Patty, who anxiously inquired what had detained him so long,
and what had been the matter. In the midst of the history of his
disaster, he was just proving to Patty that his taking the hatband to
spin his top had nothing to do with his misfortune, and he was at the
same time endeavouring to refute his uncle's opinion that the waste of
the whipcord that tied the parcel was the original cause of all his
evils, when he was summoned to try his skill with his FAMOUS bow. "My hands are benumbed; I can scarcely feel," said he, rubbing them, and
blowing upon the ends of his fingers. "Come, come," cried young Sweepstakes, "I'm within one inch of the mark;
who'll go nearer? I shall like to see. Shoot away, Hal; but first
understand our laws; we settled them before you came upon the green. You
are to have three shots, with your own bow and your own arrows; and
nobody's to borrow or lend under pretence of other's bows being better or
worse, or under any pretence. Do you hear, Hal?" This young gentleman had good reasons for being so strict in these laws,
as he had observed that none of his companions had such an excellent bow
as he had provided for himself. Some of the boys had forgotten to bring
more than one arrow with them, and by his cunning regulation that each
person should shoot with their own arrows, many had lost one or two of
their shots. "You are a lucky fellow; you have your three arrows," said young
Sweepstakes. "Come, we can't wait whilst you rub your fingers, man--
shoot away." Hal was rather surprised at the asperity with which his friend spoke. He
little knew how easily acquaintance who call themselves friends can
change when their interest comes in the slightest degree in competition
with their friendship. Hurried by his impatient rival, and with his
hands so much benumbed that he could scarcely feel how to fix the arrow
in the string, he drew the bow. The arrow was within a quarter of an
inch of Master Sweepstakes' mark, which was the nearest that had yet been
hit. Hal seized his second arrow. "If I have any luck--" said he. But
just as he pronounced the word LUCK, and as he bent his bow, the string
broke in two, and the bow fell from his hands. "There, it's all over with you!" cried Master Sweepstakes, with a
triumphant laugh. "Here's my bow for him, and welcome," said Ben. "No, no, sir," said Master Sweepstakes, "that is not fair; that's against
the regulation. You may shoot with your own bow, if you choose it, or
you may not, just as you think proper; but you must not lend it, sir." It was now Ben's turn to make his trial. His first arrow was not
successful. His second was exactly as near as Hal's first. "You have
but one more," said Master Sweepstakes--"now for it!" Ben, before he
ventured his last arrow, prudently examined the string of his bow; and,
as he pulled it to try its strength, it cracked. Master Sweepstakes
clapped his hands with loud exultations and insulting laughter. But his
laughter ceased when our provident hero calmly drew from his pocket an
excellent piece of whip cord. "The everlasting whip cord, I declare!" exclaimed Hal, when he saw that
it was the very same that had tied up the parcel. "Yes," said Ben, as he
fastened it to his bow, "I put it into my pocket, to-day, on purpose,
because I thought I might happen to want it." He drew his bow the third
and last time. "Oh, papa!" cried little Patty, as his arrow hit the mark, "it's the
nearest; is it not the nearest?" Master Sweepstakes, with anxiety, examined the hit. There could be no
doubt. Ben was victorious! The bow, the prize bow, was now delivered to
him; and Hal, as he looked at the whip-cord exclaimed, "How LUCKY this
whip-cord has been to you, Ben!" "It is LUCKY, perhaps you mean, that he took care of it," said Mr.
Gresham. "Ay," said Hal, "very true; he might well say, 'Waste not, want not.' It
is a good thing to have two strings to one's bow." OLD POZ. LUCY, daughter to the Justice. MRS. BUSTLE, landlady of the "Saracen's Head." JUSTICE HEADSTRONG. OLD MAN. WILLIAM, a Servant. SCENE I. The House of Justice Headstrong--a hall--Lucy watering some myrtles--A
servant behind the scenes is heard to say--

I tell you my master is not up. You can't see him, so go about your
business, I say. Lucy. To whom are you speaking, William? Who's that? Will. Only an old man, miss, with a complaint for my master. Lucy. Oh, then, don't send him away--don't send him away. Will. But master has not had his chocolate, ma'am. He won't ever see
anybody before he drinks his chocolate, you know, ma'am. Lucy. But let the old man, then, come in here. Perhaps he can wait a
little while. Call him. (Exit Servant.) (Lucy sings, and goes on watering her myrtles; the servant shows in the
Old Man.) Will. You can't see my master this hour; but miss will let you stay
here. Lucy (aside). Poor old man! how he trembles as he walks. (Aloud.) Sit
down, sit down. My father will see you soon; pray sit down. (He hesitates; she pushes a chair towards him.) Lucy. Pray sit down. (He sits down.) Old Man. You are very good, miss; very good. (Lucy goes to her myrtles
again.) Lucy. Ah! I'm afraid this poor myrtle is quite dead--quite dead. (The Old Man sighs, and she turns round.) Lucy (aside). I wonder what can make him sigh so! (Aloud.) My father
won't make you wait long. Old M.  Oh, ma'am, as long as he pleases. I'm in no haste--no haste. It's only a small matter. Lucy. But does a small matter make you sigh so? Old M.  Ah, miss; because, though it is a small matter in itself, it is
not a small matter to me (sighing again); it was my all, and I've lost
it. Lucy. What do you mean? What have you lost? Old M.  Why, miss--but I won't trouble you about it. Lucy. But it won't trouble me at all--I mean, I wish to hear it; so tell
it me. Old M.  Why, miss, I slept last night at the inn here, in town--the
"Saracen's Head"--

Lucy (interrupts him). Hark! there is my father coming downstairs;
follow me. You may tell me your story as we go along. Old M.  I slept at the "Saracen's Head," miss, and--
                                          (Exit, talking.) SCENE II. Justice Headstrong's Study. (He appears in his nightgown and cap, with his gouty foot upon a stool--a
table and chocolate beside him--Lucy is leaning on the arm of his chair.) Just. Well, well, my darling, presently; I'll see him presently. Lucy. Whilst you are drinking your chocolate, papa? Just. No, no, no--I never see anybody till I have done my chocolate,
darling. (He tastes his chocolate.) There's no sugar in this, child. Lucy. Yes, indeed, papa. Just. No, child--there's NO sugar, I tell you; that poz! Lucy. Oh, but, papa, I assure you I put in two lumps myself. Just. There's NO sugar, I say; why will you contradict me, child, for
ever? There's no sugar, I say. (Lucy leans over him playfully, and with his teaspoon pulls out two lumps
of sugar.) Lucy. What's this, papa? Just. Pshaw! pshaw! pshaw!--it is not melted, child--it is the same as
no sugar!.--Oh, my foot, girl, my foot!--you kill me. Go, go, I'm busy. I've business to do. Go and send William to me; do you hear, love? Lucy. And the old man, papa? Just. What old man? I tell you what, I've been plagued ever since I was
awake, and before I was awake, about that old man. If he can't wait, let
him go about his business. Don't you know, child, I never see anybody
till I've drunk my chocolate; and I never will, if it were a duke--that's
poz! Why, it has but just struck twelve; if he can't wait, he can go
about his business, can't he? Lucy. Oh, sir, he can wait. It was not he who was impatient. (She
comes back playfully.) It was only I, papa; don't be angry. Just. Well, well, well (finishing his cup of chocolate, and pushing his
dish away); and at anyrate there was not sugar enough. Send William,
send William, child; and I'll finish my own business, and then--
                (Exit Lucy, dancing, "And then!--and then!") JUSTICE, alone. Just. Oh, this foot of mine!--(twinges)--Oh, this foot! Ay, if Dr.
Sparerib could cure one of the gout, then, indeed, I should think
something of him; but, as to my leaving off my bottle of port, it's
nonsense; it's all nonsense; I can't do it; I can't, and won't, for all
the Dr. Spareribs in Christendom; that's poz! Enter WILLIAM. Just. William--oh! ay! hey! what answer, pray, did you bring from the
"Saracen's Head"? Did you see Mrs. Bustle herself, as I bid you? Will. Yes, sir, I saw the landlady herself; she said she would come up
immediately, sir. Just. Ah, that's well--immediately? Will. Yes, sir, and I hear her voice below now. Just. Oh, show her up; show Mrs. Bustle in. Enter Mrs. BUSTLE, the landlady of the "Saracen's Head." Land. Good morrow to your worship! I'm glad to see your worship look so
purely. I came up with all speed (taking breath). Our pie is in the
oven; that was what you sent for me about, I take it. Just. True; true; sit down, good Mrs. Bustle, pray--

Land. Oh, your worship's always very good (settling her apron). I came
up just as I was--only threw my shawl over me. I thought your worship
would excuse--I'm quite, as it were, rejoiced to see your worship look so
purely, and to find you up so hearty--

Just. Oh, I'm very hearty (coughing), always hearty, and thankful for
it. I hope to see many Christmas doings yet, Mrs. Bustle. And so our
pie is in the oven, I think you say? Land. In the oven it is. I put it in with my own hands; and if we have
but good luck in the baking, it will be as pretty a goose-pie--though I
say it that should not say it--as pretty a goose-pie as ever your worship
set your eyes upon. Just. Will you take a glass of anything this morning, Mrs. Bustle?--I
have some nice usquebaugh. Land. Oh, no, your worship!--I thank your worship, though, as much as if
I took it; but I just took my luncheon before I came up; or more proper,
MY SANDWICH, I should say, for the fashion's sake, to be sure. A
LUNCHEON won't go down with nobody nowadays (laughs). I expect hostler
and boots will be calling for their sandwiches just now (laughs again). I'm sure I beg your worship's pardon for mentioning a LUNCHEON. Just. Oh, Mrs. Bustle, the word's a good word, for it means a good
thing--ha! ha! ha! (pulls out his watch); but pray, is it luncheon time. Why, it's past one, I declare; and I thought I was up in remarkably good
time, too. Land. Well, and to be sure so it was, remarkably good time for your
worship; but folks in our way must be up betimes, you know. I've been up
and about these seven hours! Just. (stretching). Seven hours! Land. Ay, indeed--eight, I might say, for I am an early little body;
though I say it that should not say it--I AM an early little body. Just. An early little body, as you say, Mrs. Bustle; so I shall have my
goose-pie for dinner, hey? Land. For dinner, as sure as the clock strikes four--but I mustn't stay
prating, for it may be spoiling if I'm away; so I must wish your worship
a good morning. (She curtsies.) Just. No ceremony--no ceremony; good Mrs. Bustle, your servant. Enter William, to take away the chocolate. The Landlady is putting on
her shawl. Just. You may let that man know, William, that I have dispatched my OWN
business, and am at leisure for his now (taking a pinch of snuff). Hum! pray, William (Justice leans back gravely), what sort of a looking fellow
is he, pray? Will. Most like a sort of travelling man, in my opinion, sir--or
something that way, I take it,

(At these words the landlady turns round inquisitively, and delays, that
she may listen, while she is putting on and pinning her shawl.) Just. Hum! a sort of a travelling man. Hum! lay my books out open at
the title Vagrant; and, William, tell the cook that Mrs. Bustle promises
me the goose-pie for dinner. Four o'clock, do you hear? And show the
old man in now. (The Landlady looks eagerly towards the door, as it opens, and exclaims,)

Land. My old gentleman, as I hope to breathe! Enter the OLD MAN. (Lucy follows the Old Man on tiptoe--The Justice leans back and looks
consequential--The Landlady sets her arms akimbo--The Old Man starts as
he sees her.) Just. What stops you, friend? Come forward, if you please. Land. (advancing). So, sir, is it you, sir? Ay, you little thought, I
warrant ye, to meet me here with his worship; but there you reckoned
without your host--Out of the frying-pan into the fire. Just. What is all this? What is this? Land. (running on). None of your flummery stuff will go down with his
worship no more than with me, I give you warning; so you may go further
and fare worse, and spare your breath to cool your porridge. Just. (waves his hand with dignity). Mrs. Bustle, good Mrs. Bustle,
remember where you are. Silence! silence! Come forward, sir, and let me
hear what you have to say. (The Old Man comes forward.) Just. Who and what may you be, friend, and what is your business with
me? Land. Sir, if your worship will give me leave--

                        (Justice makes a sign to her to be silent). Old M.  Please, your worship, I am an old soldier. Land. (interrupting). An old hypocrite, say. Just. Mrs. Bustle, pray, I desire, let the man speak. Old M.  For these two years past--ever since, please your worship--I
wasn't able to work any longer; for in my youth I did work as well as the
best of them. Land. (eager to interrupt). You work--you--

Just. Let him finish his story, I say. Lucy. Ay, do, do, papa, speak for him. Pray, Mrs. Bustle--

Land. (turning suddenly round to Lucy). Miss, a good morrow to you,
ma'am. I humbly beg your apologies for not seeing you sooner, Miss Lucy. (Justice nods to the Old Man, who goes on.) Old Man. But please your worship, it pleased God to take away the use of
my left arm; and since that I have never been able to work. Land. Flummery! flummery! Just. (angrily). Mrs. Bustle, I have desired silence, and I will have
it, that's poz! You shall have your turn presently. Old M.  For these two years past (for why should I be ashamed to tell the
truth?) I have lived upon charity, and I scraped together a guinea and a
half and upwards, and I was travelling with it to my grandson, in the
north, with him to end my days--but (sighing)--

Just. But what? Proceed, pray, to the point. Old M.  But last night I slept here in town, please your worship, at the
"Saracen's Head." Land. (in a rage). At the "Saracen's Head"! Yes, forsooth! none such
ever slept at the "Saracen's Head" afore, or shall afterwards, as long as
my name's Bustle, and the "Saracen's Head" is the "Saracen's Head." Just. Again! again! Mrs. Landlady, this is downright--I have said you
should speak presently. He SHALL speak first, since I've said it--that's
poz! Speak on, friend. You slept last night at the "Saracen's Head." Old M.  Yes, please your worship, and I accuse nobody; but at night I had
my little money safe, and in the morning it was gone. Land. Gone!--gone, indeed, in my house! and this is the way I'm to be
treated! Is it so? I couldn't but speak, your worship, to such an
inhuman like, out o' the way, scandalous charge, if King George and all
the Royal Family were sitting in your worship's chair, beside you, to
silence me (turning to the Old Man). And this is your gratitude,
forsooth! Didn't you tell me that any hole in my house was good enough
for you, wheedling hypocrite? And the thanks I receive is to call me and
mine a pack of thieves. Old M.  Oh, no, no, no, NO--a pack of thieves, by no means. Land. Ay, I thought when _I_ came to speak we should have you upon your
marrow-bones in--

Just. (imperiously). Silence! Five times have I commanded silence, and
five times in vain; and I won't command anything five times in vain--
THAT'S POZ! Land. (in a pet, aside). Old Poz! (aloud). Then, your worship, I don't
see any business I have to be waiting here; the folks want me at home
(returning and whispering). Shall I send the goose-pie up, your worship,
if it's ready? Just. (with magnanimity). I care not for the goose-pie, Mrs. Bustle. Do not talk to me of goose-pies; this is no place to talk of pies. Land. Oh, for that matter, your worship knows best, to be sure. (Exit Landlady, angry.) SCENE III. JUSTICE HEADSTRONG, OLD MAN and LUCY. Lucy. Ah, now, I'm glad he can speak; now tell papa; and you need not be
afraid to speak to him, for he is very good-natured. Don't contradict
him, though, because he told ME not. Just. Oh, darling, YOU shall contradict me as often as you please--only
not before I've drunk my chocolate, child--hey! Go on, my good friend;
you see what it is to live in Old England, where, thank Heaven, the
poorest of His Majesty's subjects may have justice, and speak his mind
before the first in the land. Now speak on; and you hear she tells you
that you need not be afraid of me. Speak on. Old M.  I thank your worship, I'm sure. Just. Thank me! for what, sir? I won't be thanked for doing justice,
sir; so--but explain this matter. You lost your money, hey, at the
"Saracen's Head"? You had it safe last night, hey?--and you missed it
this morning? Are you sure you had it safe at night? Old M.  Oh, please your worship, quite sure; for I took it out and looked
at it just before I said my prayers. Just. You did--did ye so?--hum! Pray, my good friend, where might you
put your money when you went to bed? Old M.  Please, your worship, where I always put it--always--in my
tobacco-box. Just. Your tobacco-box! I never heard of such a thing--to make a STRONG
BOX of a tobacco-box. Ha! ha! ha! hum!--and you say the box and all were
gone in the morning? Old M.  No, please your worship, no; not the box--the box was never
stirred from the place where I put it. They left me the box. Just. Tut, tut, tut, man!--took the money and left the box? I'll never
believe THAT! I'll never believe that anyone could be such a fool. Tut,
tut! the thing's impossible! It's well you are not upon oath. Old M.  If I were, please your worship, I should say the same; for it is
the truth. Just. Don't tell me, don't tell me; I say the thing is impossible. Old M.  Please, your worship, here's the box. Just. (goes on without looking at it). Nonsense! nonsense! it's no such
thing; it's no such thing, I say--no man would take the money and leave
the tobacco-box. I won't believe it. Nothing shall make me believe it
ever--that's poz. Lucy (takes the box, and holds it up before her father's eyes). You did
not see the box, did you, papa! Just. Yes, yes, yes, child--nonsense! it's all a lie from beginning to
end. A man who tells one lie will tell a hundred. All a lie! all a lie! Old M.  If your worship would give me leave--

Just. Sir, it does not signify--it does not signify! I've said it, I've
said it, and that's enough to convince me, and I'll tell you more; if my
Lord Chief Justice of England told it to me, I would not believe it--
that's poz! Lucy (still playing with the box). But how comes the box here, I wonder? Just. Pshaw! pshaw! pshaw!