"There's that girl in the canoe again," said Flambeau irrelevantly,
for good-looking young women would call him off any topic. "She seems bothered by the queer tower just as we were." Indeed, the black-haired young lady was letting her canoe float
slowly and silently past the strange islet; and was looking intently up
at the strange tower, with a strong glow of curiosity on her oval
and olive face. "Never mind girls," said Fanshaw impatiently, "there are plenty
of them in the world, but not many things like the Pendragon Tower. As you may easily suppose, plenty of superstitions and scandals
have followed in the track of the Spaniard's curse; and no doubt,
as you would put it, any accident happening to this Cornish family
would be connected with it by rural credulity. But it is perfectly true
that this tower has been burnt down two or three times; and the family
can't be called lucky, for more than two, I think, of the Admiral's
near kin have perished by shipwreck; and one at least, to my own knowledge,
on practically the same spot where Sir Peter threw the Spaniard overboard." "What a pity!" exclaimed Flambeau. "She's going." "When did your friend the Admiral tell you this family history?" asked Father Brown, as the girl in the canoe paddled off,
without showing the least intention of extending her interest from
the tower to the yacht, which Fanshaw had already caused to lie
alongside the island. "Many years ago," replied Fanshaw; "he hasn't been to sea for
some time now, though he is as keen on it as ever. I believe there's
a family compact or something. Well, here's the landing stage;
let's come ashore and see the old boy." They followed him on to the island, just under the tower,
and Father Brown, whether from the mere touch of dry land, or the interest
of something on the other bank of the river (which he stared at
very hard for some seconds), seemed singularly improved in briskness. They entered a wooded avenue between two fences of thin greyish wood,
such as often enclose parks or gardens, and over the top of which
the dark trees tossed to and fro like black and purple plumes upon
the hearse of a giant. The tower, as they left it behind,
looked all the quainter, because such entrances are usually flanked
by two towers; and this one looked lopsided. But for this, the avenue
had the usual appearance of the entrance to a gentleman's grounds;
and, being so curved that the house was now out of sight,
somehow looked a much larger park than any plantation on such an island
could really be. Father Brown was, perhaps, a little fanciful
in his fatigue, but he almost thought the whole place must be
growing larger, as things do in a nightmare. Anyhow, a mystical monotony
was the only character of their march, until Fanshaw suddenly stopped,
and pointed to something sticking out through the grey fence--
something that looked at first rather like the imprisoned horn
of some beast. Closer observation showed that it was
a slightly curved blade of metal that shone faintly in the fading light. Flambeau, who like all Frenchmen had been a soldier, bent over it
and said in a startled voice:  "Why, it's a sabre! I believe
I know the sort, heavy and curved, but shorter than the cavalry;
they used to have them in artillery and the--"

     As he spoke the blade plucked itself out of the crack it had made
and came down again with a more ponderous slash, splitting
the fissiparous fence to the bottom with a rending noise. Then it was pulled out again, flashed above the fence some feet
further along, and again split it halfway down with the first stroke;
and after waggling a little to extricate itself (accompanied with
curses in the darkness) split it down to the ground with a second. Then a kick of devilish energy sent the whole loosened square
of thin wood flying into the pathway, and a great gap of dark coppice
gaped in the paling. Fanshaw peered into the dark opening and uttered an exclamation
of astonishment. "My dear Admiral!" he exclaimed, "do you--er--
do you generally cut out a new front door whenever you want to
go for a walk?" The voice in the gloom swore again, and then broke into a jolly laugh. "No," it said; "I've really got to cut down this fence somehow;
it's spoiling all the plants, and no one else here can do it. But I'll only carve another bit off the front door, and then come out
and welcome you." And sure enough, he heaved up his weapon once more, and,
hacking twice, brought down another and similar strip of fence,
making the opening about fourteen feet wide in all. Then through this
larger forest gateway he came out into the evening light,
with a chip of grey wood sticking to his sword-blade. He momentarily fulfilled all Fanshaw's fable of an old piratical
Admiral; though the details seemed afterwards to decompose into accidents. For instance, he wore a broad-brimmed hat as protection against the sun;
but the front flap of it was turned up straight to the sky, and the
two corners pulled down lower than the ears, so that it stood across
his forehead in a crescent like the old cocked hat worn by Nelson. He wore an ordinary dark-blue jacket, with nothing special about
the buttons, but the combination of it with white linen trousers
somehow had a sailorish look. He was tall and loose, and walked with
a sort of swagger, which was not a sailor's roll, and yet somehow
suggested it; and he held in his hand a short sabre which was like
a navy cutlass, but about twice as big. Under the bridge of the hat
his eagle face looked eager, all the more because it was not only
clean-shaven, but without eyebrows. It seemed almost as if all
the hair had come off his face from his thrusting it through
a throng of elements. His eyes were prominent and piercing. His colour was curiously attractive, while partly tropical;
it reminded one vaguely of a blood-orange. That is, that while it was
ruddy and sanguine, there was a yellow in it that was in no way sickly,
but seemed rather to glow like gold apples of the Hesperides--
Father Brown thought he had never seen a figure so expressive
of all the romances about the countries of the Sun. When Fanshaw had presented his two friends to their host
he fell again into a tone of rallying the latter about his wreckage
of the fence and his apparent rage of profanity. The Admiral pooh-poohed
it at first as a piece of necessary but annoying garden work;
but at length the ring of real energy came back into his laughter,
and he cried with a mixture of impatience and good humour:

     "Well, perhaps I do go at it a bit rabidly, and feel
a kind of pleasure in smashing anything. So would you if your
only pleasure was in cruising about to find some new Cannibal Islands,
and you had to stick on this muddy little rockery in a sort of rustic pond. When I remember how I've cut down a mile and a half of green poisonous
jungle with an old cutlass half as sharp as this; and then remember
I must stop here and chop this matchwood, because of some confounded
old bargain scribbled in a family Bible, why, I--"

     He swung up the heavy steel again; and this time sundered
the wall of wood from top to bottom at one stroke. "I feel like that," he said laughing, but furiously flinging
the sword some yards down the path, "and now let's go up to the house;
you must have some dinner." The semicircle of lawn in front of the house was varied by
three circular garden beds, one of red tulips, a second of
yellow tulips, and the third of some white, waxen-looking blossoms
that the visitors did not know and presumed to be exotic. A heavy, hairy and rather sullen-looking gardener was hanging up
a heavy coil of garden hose. The corners of the expiring sunset
which seemed to cling about the corners of the house gave glimpses
here and there of the colours of remoter flowerbeds; and in
a treeless space on one side of the house opening upon the river
stood a tall brass tripod on which was tilted a big brass telescope. Just outside the steps of the porch stood a little painted
green garden table, as if someone had just had tea there. The entrance was flanked with two of those half-featured lumps of stone
with holes for eyes that are said to be South Sea idols; and on
the brown oak beam across the doorway were some confused carvings
that looked almost as barbaric. As they passed indoors, the little cleric hopped suddenly
on to the table, and standing on it peered unaffectedly
through his spectacles at the mouldings in the oak. Admiral Pendragon
looked very much astonished, though not particularly annoyed;
while Fanshaw was so amused with what looked like a performing pigmy
on his little stand, that he could not control his laughter. But Father Brown was not likely to notice either the laughter
or the astonishment. He was gazing at three carved symbols, which, though very worn
and obscure, seemed still to convey some sense to him. The first
seemed to be the outline of some tower or other building, crowned with
what looked like curly-pointed ribbons. The second was clearer:
an old Elizabethan galley with decorative waves beneath it,
but interrupted in the middle by a curious jagged rock, which was either
a fault in the wood or some conventional representation of the water
coming in. The third represented the upper half of a human figure,
ending in an escalloped line like the waves; the face was rubbed
and featureless, and both arms were held very stiffly up in the air. "Well," muttered Father Brown, blinking, "here is the legend
of the Spaniard plain enough. Here he is holding up his arms
and cursing in the sea; and here are the two curses:  the wrecked ship
and the burning of Pendragon Tower." Pendragon shook his head with a kind of venerable amusement. "And how many other things might it not be?" he said. "Don't you know
that that sort of half-man, like a half-lion or half-stag,
is quite common in heraldry? Might not that line through the ship
be one of those parti-per-pale lines, indented, I think they call it? And though the third thing isn't so very heraldic, it would be
more heraldic to suppose it a tower crowned with laurel than with fire;
and it looks just as like it." "But it seems rather odd," said Flambeau, "that it should
exactly confirm the old legend." "Ah," replied the sceptical traveller, "but you don't know
how much of the old legend may have been made up from the old figures. Besides, it isn't the only old legend. Fanshaw, here, who is
fond of such things, will tell you there are other versions of the tale,
and much more horrible ones. One story credits my unfortunate ancestor
with having had the Spaniard cut in two; and that will fit
the pretty picture also. Another obligingly credits our family
with the possession of a tower full of snakes and explains those little,
wriggly things in that way. And a third theory supposes the crooked line
on the ship to be a conventionalized thunderbolt; but that alone,
if seriously examined, would show what a very little way these
unhappy coincidences really go." "Why, how do you mean?" asked Fanshaw. "It so happens," replied his host coolly, "that there was
no thunder and lightning at all in the two or three shipwrecks
I know of in our family." "Oh!" said Father Brown, and jumped down from the little table. There was another silence in which they heard the continuous murmur
of the river; then Fanshaw said, in a doubtful and perhaps
disappointed tone:  "Then you don't think there is anything in the
tales of the tower in flames?" "There are the tales, of course," said the Admiral,
shrugging his shoulders; "and some of them, I don't deny,
on evidence as decent as one ever gets for such things. Someone saw a blaze hereabout, don't you know, as he walked home
through a wood; someone keeping sheep on the uplands inland thought
he saw a flame hovering over Pendragon Tower. Well, a damp dab of mud
like this confounded island seems the last place where one would
think of fires." "What is that fire over there?" asked Father Brown with
a gentle suddenness, pointing to the woods on the left river-bank. They were all thrown a little off their balance, and the more fanciful
Fanshaw had even some difficulty in recovering his, as they saw a long,
thin stream of blue smoke ascending silently into the end of
the evening light. Then Pendragon broke into a scornful laugh again. "Gipsies!" he said; "they've been camping about here for about a week. Gentlemen, you want your dinner," and he turned as if to enter the house. But the antiquarian superstition in Fanshaw was still quivering,
and he said hastily:  "But, Admiral, what's that hissing noise
quite near the island? It's very like fire." "It's more like what it is," said the Admiral, laughing as he
led the way; "it's only some canoe going by." Almost as he spoke, the butler, a lean man in black,
with very black hair and a very long, yellow face, appeared in the doorway
and told him that dinner was served. The dining-room was as nautical as the cabin of a ship;
but its note was rather that of the modern than the Elizabethan captain. There were, indeed, three antiquated cutlasses in a trophy over
the fireplace, and one brown sixteenth-century map with Tritons
and little ships dotted about a curly sea. But such things were
less prominent on the white panelling than some cases of quaint-coloured
South American birds, very scientifically stuffed, fantastic shells
from the Pacific, and several instruments so rude and queer in shape
that savages might have used them either to kill their enemies or
to cook them. But the alien colour culminated in the fact that,
besides the butler, the Admiral's only servants were two negroes,
somewhat quaintly clad in tight uniforms of yellow. The priest's
instinctive trick of analysing his own impressions told him that
the colour and the little neat coat-tails of these bipeds had suggested
the word "Canary," and so by a mere pun connected them with
southward travel. Towards the end of the dinner they took their
yellow clothes and black faces out of the room, leaving only
the black clothes and yellow face of the butler. "I'm rather sorry you take this so lightly," said Fanshaw to the host;
"for the truth is, I've brought these friends of mine with the idea
of their helping you, as they know a good deal of these things. Don't you really believe in the family story at all?" "I don't believe in anything," answered Pendragon very briskly,
with a bright eye cocked at a red tropical bird. "I'm a man of science." Rather to Flambeau's surprise, his clerical friend,
who seemed to have entirely woken up, took up the digression and
talked natural history with his host with a flow of words and
much unexpected information, until the dessert and decanters were
set down and the last of the servants vanished. Then he said,
without altering his tone. "Please don't think me impertinent, Admiral Pendragon. I don't
ask for curiosity, but really for my guidance and your convenience. Have I made a bad shot if I guess you don't want these old things
talked of before your butler?" The Admiral lifted the hairless arches over his eyes and exclaimed:
"Well, I don't know where you got it, but the truth is I can't stand
the fellow, though I've no excuse for discharging a family servant. Fanshaw, with his fairy tales, would say my blood moved against men
with that black, Spanish-looking hair." Flambeau struck the table with his heavy fist. "By Jove!" he cried;
"and so had that girl!" "I hope it'll all end tonight," continued the Admiral,
"when my nephew comes back safe from his ship. You looked surprised. You won't understand, I suppose, unless I tell you the story. You see, my father had two sons; I remained a bachelor,
but my elder brother married, and had a son who became a sailor
like all the rest of us, and will inherit the proper estate. Well, my father was a strange man; he somehow combined Fanshaw's
superstition with a good deal of my scepticism--they were always
fighting in him; and after my first voyages, he developed a notion
which he thought somehow would settle finally whether the curse
was truth or trash. If all the Pendragons sailed about anyhow,
he thought there would be too much chance of natural catastrophes
to prove anything. But if we went to sea one at a time in strict order
of succession to the property, he thought it might show whether any
connected fate followed the family as a family. It was a silly notion,
I think, and I quarrelled with my father pretty heartily; for I was
an ambitious man and was left to the last, coming, by succession,
after my own nephew." "And your father and brother," said the priest, very gently,
"died at sea, I fear." "Yes," groaned the Admiral; "by one of those brutal accidents
on which are built all the lying mythologies of mankind,
they were both shipwrecked. My father, coming up this coast
out of the Atlantic, was washed up on these Cornish rocks. My brother's ship was sunk, no one knows where, on the voyage home
from Tasmania. His body was never found. I tell you it was
from perfectly natural mishap; lots of other people besides Pendragons
were drowned; and both disasters are discussed in a normal way
by navigators. But, of course, it set this forest of superstition on fire;
and men saw the flaming tower everywhere. That's why I say it will
be all right when Walter returns. The girl he's engaged to was
coming today; but I was so afraid of some chance delay frightening her
that I wired her not to come till she heard from me. But he's practically
sure to be here some time tonight, and then it'll all end in smoke--
tobacco smoke. We'll crack that old lie when we crack a bottle
of this wine." "Very good wine," said Father Brown, gravely lifting his glass,
"but, as you see, a very bad wine-bibber. I most sincerely
beg your pardon":  for he had spilt a small spot of wine on
the table-cloth. He drank and put down the glass with a composed face;
but his hand had started at the exact moment when he became conscious
of a face looking in through the garden window just behind the Admiral--
the face of a woman, swarthy, with southern hair and eyes, and young,
but like a mask of tragedy. After a pause the priest spoke again in his mild manner. "Admiral," he said, "will you do me a favour? Let me, and my friends
if they like, stop in that tower of yours just for tonight? Do you know that in my business you're an exorcist almost before
anything else?" Pendragon sprang to his feet and paced swiftly to and fro
across the window, from which the face had instantly vanished. "I tell you there is nothing in it," he cried, with ringing violence. "There is one thing I know about this matter. You may call me an atheist. I am an atheist." Here he swung round and fixed Father Brown with a face
of frightful concentration. "This business is perfectly natural. There is no curse in it at all." Father Brown smiled. "In that case," he said, "there can't be
any objection to my sleeping in your delightful summer-house." "The idea is utterly ridiculous," replied the Admiral,
beating a tattoo on the back of his chair. "Please forgive me for everything," said Brown in his most
sympathetic tone, "including spilling the wine. But it seems to me
you are not quite so easy about the flaming tower as you try to be." Admiral Pendragon sat down again as abruptly as he had risen;
but he sat quite still, and when he spoke again it was in a lower voice. "You do it at your own peril," he said; "but wouldn't you be an atheist
to keep sane in all this devilry?" Some three hours afterwards Fanshaw, Flambeau and the priest
were still dawdling about the garden in the dark; and it began to dawn
on the other two that Father Brown had no intention of going to bed
either in the tower or the house. "I think the lawn wants weeding," said he dreamily. "If I could find a spud or something I'd do it myself." They followed him, laughing and half remonstrating; but he replied
with the utmost solemnity, explaining to them, in a maddening little sermon,
that one can always find some small occupation that is helpful to others. He did not find a spud; but he found an old broom made of twigs,
with which he began energetically to brush the fallen leaves off the grass. "Always some little thing to be done," he said with
idiotic cheerfulness; "as George Herbert says:  `Who sweeps
an Admiral's garden in Cornwall as for Thy laws makes that and
the action fine.' And now," he added, suddenly slinging the broom away,
"Let's go and water the flowers." With the same mixed emotions they watched him uncoil some
considerable lengths of the large garden hose, saying with an air of
wistful discrimination:  "The red tulips before the yellow, I think. Look a bit dry, don't you think?" He turned the little tap on the instrument, and the water shot out
straight and solid as a long rod of steel. "Look out, Samson," cried Flambeau; "why, you've cut off
the tulip's head." Father Brown stood ruefully contemplating the decapitated plant. "Mine does seem to be a rather kill or cure sort of watering,"
he admitted, scratching his head. "I suppose it's a pity I didn't
find the spud. You should have seen me with the spud! Talking of tools,
you've got that swordstick, Flambeau, you always carry? That's right;
and Sir Cecil could have that sword the Admiral threw away
by the fence here. How grey everything looks!" "The mist's rising from the river," said the staring Flambeau. Almost as he spoke the huge figure of the hairy gardener appeared
on a higher ridge of the trenched and terraced lawn, hailing them with
a brandished rake and a horribly bellowing voice. "Put down that hose,"
he shouted; "put down that hose and go to your--"

     "I am fearfully clumsy," replied the reverend gentleman weakly;
"do you know, I upset some wine at dinner." He made a wavering
half-turn of apology towards the gardener, with the hose still spouting
in his hand. The gardener caught the cold crash of the water
full in his face like the crash of a cannon-ball; staggered,
slipped and went sprawling with his boots in the air. "How very dreadful!" said Father Brown, looking round in
a sort of wonder. "Why, I've hit a man!" He stood with his head forward for a moment as if
looking or listening; and then set off at a trot towards the tower,
still trailing the hose behind him. The tower was quite close,
but its outline was curiously dim. "Your river mist," he said, "has a rum smell." "By the Lord it has," cried Fanshaw, who was very white. "But you can't mean--"

     "I mean," said Father Brown, "that one of the Admiral's scientific
predictions is coming true tonight. This story is going to end in smoke." As he spoke a most beautiful rose-red light seemed to burst
into blossom like a gigantic rose; but accompanied with a crackling
and rattling noise that was like the laughter of devils. "My God! what is this?" cried Sir Cecil Fanshaw. "The sign of the flaming tower," said Father Brown, and sent
the driving water from his hose into the heart of the red patch. "Lucky we hadn't gone to bed!" ejaculated Fanshaw. "I suppose
it can't spread to the house." "You may remember," said the priest quietly, "that the wooden fence
that might have carried it was cut away." Flambeau turned electrified eyes upon his friend, but Fanshaw
only said rather absently:  "Well, nobody can be killed, anyhow." "This is rather a curious kind of tower," observed Father Brown,
"when it takes to killing people, it always kills people
who are somewhere else." At the same instant the monstrous figure of the gardener with
the streaming beard stood again on the green ridge against the sky,
waving others to come on; but now waving not a rake but a cutlass. Behind him came the two negroes, also with the old crooked cutlasses
out of the trophy. But in the blood-red glare, with their black faces
and yellow figures, they looked like devils carrying instruments of torture. In the dim garden behind them a distant voice was heard calling out
brief directions. When the priest heard the voice, a terrible change
came over his countenance. But he remained composed; and never took his eye off
the patch of flame which had begun by spreading, but now seemed
to shrink a little as it hissed under the torch of the long silver spear
of water. He kept his finger along the nozzle of the pipe to ensure the aim,
and attended to no other business, knowing only by the noise and
that semi-conscious corner of the eye, the exciting incidents that
began to tumble themselves about the island garden. He gave two brief
directions to his friends. One was:  "Knock these fellows down somehow
and tie them up, whoever they are; there's rope down by those faggots. They want to take away my nice hose." The other was:  "As soon as you
get a chance, call out to that canoeing girl; she's over on the bank
with the gipsies. Ask her if they could get some buckets across
and fill them from the river." Then he closed his mouth and continued
to water the new red flower as ruthlessly as he had watered the red tulip. He never turned his head to look at the strange fight that
followed between the foes and friends of the mysterious fire. He almost felt the island shake when Flambeau collided with
the huge gardener; he merely imagined how it would whirl round them
as they wrestled. He heard the crashing fall; and his friend's
gasp of triumph as he dashed on to the first negro; and the cries
of both the blacks as Flambeau and Fanshaw bound them. Flambeau's enormous strength more than redressed the odds in the fight,
especially as the fourth man still hovered near the house,
only a shadow and a voice. He heard also the water broken by
the paddles of a canoe; the girl's voice giving orders,
the voices of gipsies answering and coming nearer, the plumping and
sucking noise of empty buckets plunged into a full stream; and finally
the sound of many feet around the fire. But all this was less to him
than the fact that the red rent, which had lately once more increased,
had once more slightly diminished. Then came a cry that very nearly made him turn his head. Flambeau and Fanshaw, now reinforced by some of the gipsies,
had rushed after the mysterious man by the house; and he heard from
the other end of the garden the Frenchman's cry of horror and astonishment. It was echoed by a howl not to be called human, as the being broke
from their hold and ran along the garden. Three times at least
it raced round the whole island, in a way that was as horrible as
the chase of a lunatic, both in the cries of the pursued and the ropes
carried by the pursuers; but was more horrible still, because it somehow
suggested one of the chasing games of children in a garden. Then, finding them closing in on every side, the figure sprang upon
one of the higher river banks and disappeared with a splash
into the dark and driving river. "You can do no more, I fear," said Brown in a voice cold with pain. "He has been washed down to the rocks by now, where he has sent
so many others. He knew the use of a family legend." "Oh, don't talk in these parables," cried Flambeau impatiently. "Can't you put it simply in words of one syllable?" "Yes," answered Brown, with his eye on the hose. "`Both eyes bright,
she's all right; one eye blinks, down she sinks.'" The fire hissed and shrieked more and more, like a strangled thing,
as it grew narrower and narrower under the flood from the pipe and buckets,
but Father Brown still kept his eye on it as he went on speaking:

     "I thought of asking this young lady, if it were morning yet,
to look through that telescope at the river mouth and the river. She might have seen something to interest her:  the sign of the ship,
or Mr Walter Pendragon coming home, and perhaps even the sign of
the half-man, for though he is certainly safe by now, he may very well
have waded ashore. He has been within a shave of another shipwreck;
and would never have escaped it, if the lady hadn't had the sense
to suspect the old Admiral's telegram and come down to watch him. Don't let's talk about the old Admiral. Don't let's talk about anything. It's enough to say that whenever this tower, with its pitch and resin-wood,
really caught fire, the spark on the horizon always looked like
the twin light to the coast light-house." "And that," said Flambeau, "is how the father and brother died. The wicked uncle of the legends very nearly got his estate after all." Father Brown did not answer; indeed, he did not speak again,
save for civilities, till they were all safe round a cigar-box in
the cabin of the yacht. He saw that the frustrated fire was extinguished;
and then refused to linger, though he actually heard young Pendragon,
escorted by an enthusiastic crowd, come tramping up the river bank;
and might (had he been moved by romantic curiosities) have received
the combined thanks of the man from the ship and the girl from the canoe. But his fatigue had fallen on him once more, and he only started once,
when Flambeau abruptly told him he had dropped cigar-ash on his trousers. "That's no cigar-ash," he said rather wearily. "That's from the fire,
but you don't think so because you're all smoking cigars. That's just the way I got my first faint suspicion about the chart." "Do you mean Pendragon's chart of his Pacific Islands?" asked Fanshaw. "You thought it was a chart of the Pacific Islands," answered Brown. "Put a feather with a fossil and a bit of coral and everyone will
think it's a specimen. Put the same feather with a ribbon and
an artificial flower and everyone will think it's for a lady's hat. Put the same feather with an ink-bottle, a book and a stack
of writing-paper, and most men will swear they've seen a quill pen. So you saw that map among tropic birds and shells and thought it was
a map of Pacific Islands. It was the map of this river." "But how do you know?" asked Fanshaw. "I saw the rock you thought was like a dragon, and the one
like Merlin, and--"

     "You seem to have noticed a lot as we came in," cried Fanshaw. "We thought you were rather abstracted." "I was sea-sick," said Father Brown simply. "I felt simply horrible. But feeling horrible has nothing to do with not seeing things." And he closed his eyes. "Do you think most men would have seen that?" asked Flambeau. He received no answer:  Father Brown was asleep. IX. The God of the Gongs


IT was one of those chilly and empty afternoons in early winter,
when the daylight is silver rather than gold and pewter rather than silver. If it was dreary in a hundred bleak offices and yawning drawing-rooms,
it was drearier still along the edges of the flat Essex coast,
where the monotony was the more inhuman for being broken
at very long intervals by a lamp-post that looked less civilized
than a tree, or a tree that looked more ugly than a lamp-post. A light fall of snow had half-melted into a few strips, also looking leaden
rather than silver, when it had been fixed again by the seal of frost;
no fresh snow had fallen, but a ribbon of the old snow ran along
the very margin of the coast, so as to parallel the pale ribbon of the foam. The line of the sea looked frozen in the very vividness of
its violet-blue, like the vein of a frozen finger. For miles and miles,
forward and back, there was no breathing soul, save two pedestrians,
walking at a brisk pace, though one had much longer legs and took
much longer strides than the other. It did not seem a very appropriate place or time for a holiday,
but Father Brown had few holidays, and had to take them when he could,
and he always preferred, if possible, to take them in company with
his old friend Flambeau, ex-criminal and ex-detective. The priest had
had a fancy for visiting his old parish at Cobhole, and was going
north-eastward along the coast. After walking a mile or two farther, they found that the shore was
beginning to be formally embanked, so as to form something like a parade;
the ugly lamp-posts became less few and far between and more ornamental,
though quite equally ugly. Half a mile farther on Father Brown
was puzzled first by little labyrinths of flowerless flower-pots,
covered with the low, flat, quiet-coloured plants that look less like
a garden than a tessellated pavement, between weak curly paths studded
with seats with curly backs. He faintly sniffed the atmosphere of
a certain sort of seaside town that be did not specially care about,
and, looking ahead along the parade by the sea, he saw something that
put the matter beyond a doubt. In the grey distance the big bandstand
of a watering-place stood up like a giant mushroom with six legs. "I suppose," said Father Brown, turning up his coat-collar
and drawing a woollen scarf rather closer round his neck,
"that we are approaching a pleasure resort." "I fear," answered Flambeau, "a pleasure resort to which
few people just now have the pleasure of resorting. They try to
revive these places in the winter, but it never succeeds except with
Brighton and the old ones. This must be Seawood, I think--
Lord Pooley's experiment; he had the Sicilian Singers down at Christmas,
and there's talk about holding one of the great glove-fights here. But they'll have to chuck the rotten place into the sea;
it's as dreary as a lost railway-carriage." They had come under the big bandstand, and the priest was
looking up at it with a curiosity that had something rather odd about it,
his head a little on one side, like a bird's. It was the conventional,
rather tawdry kind of erection for its purpose:  a flattened dome
or canopy, gilt here and there, and lifted on six slender pillars
of painted wood, the whole being raised about five feet above the parade
on a round wooden platform like a drum. But there was something
fantastic about the snow combined with something artificial about
the gold that haunted Flambeau as well as his friend with
some association he could not capture, but which he knew was at once
artistic and alien. "I've got it," he said at last. "It's Japanese. It's like
those fanciful Japanese prints, where the snow on the mountain
looks like sugar, and the gilt on the pagodas is like gilt on gingerbread. It looks just like a little pagan temple." "Yes," said Father Brown. "Let's have a look at the god." And with an agility hardly to be expected of him, he hopped up
on to the raised platform. "Oh, very well," said Flambeau, laughing; and the next instant
his own towering figure was visible on that quaint elevation. Slight as was the difference of height, it gave in those level wastes
a sense of seeing yet farther and farther across land and sea. Inland the little wintry gardens faded into a confused grey copse;
beyond that, in the distance, were long low barns of a lonely farmhouse,
and beyond that nothing but the long East Anglian plains. Seawards there was no sail or sign of life save a few seagulls:
and even they looked like the last snowflakes, and seemed to float
rather than fly. Flambeau turned abruptly at an exclamation behind him. It seemed to come from lower down than might have been expected,
and to be addressed to his heels rather than his head. He instantly
held out his hand, but he could hardly help laughing at what he saw. For some reason or other the platform had given way under Father Brown,
and the unfortunate little man had dropped through to the level
of the parade. He was just tall enough, or short enough,
for his head alone to stick out of the hole in the broken wood,
looking like St John the Baptist's head on a charger. The face wore
a disconcerted expression, as did, perhaps, that of St John the Baptist. In a moment he began to laugh a little. "This wood must be rotten,"
said Flambeau. "Though it seems odd it should bear me, and you go through
the weak place. Let me help you out." But the little priest was looking rather curiously at the corners
and edges of the wood alleged to be rotten, and there was a sort of trouble
on his brow. "Come along," cried Flambeau impatiently, still with his big
brown hand extended. "Don't you want to get out?" The priest was holding a splinter of the broken wood between
his finger and thumb, and did not immediately reply. At last he said
thoughtfully:  "Want to get out? Why, no. I rather think I want
to get in." And he dived into the darkness under the wooden floor
so abruptly as to knock off his big curved clerical hat and leave it
lying on the boards above, without any clerical head in it. Flambeau looked once more inland and out to sea, and once more
could see nothing but seas as wintry as the snow, and snows as level
as the sea. There came a scurrying noise behind him, and the little priest
came scrambling out of the hole faster than he had fallen in. His face was no longer disconcerted, but rather resolute, and,
perhaps only through the reflections of the snow, a trifle paler than usual. "Well?" asked his tall friend. "Have you found the god
of the temple?" "No," answered Father Brown. "I have found what was sometimes
more important. The Sacrifice." "What the devil do you mean?" cried Flambeau, quite alarmed. Father Brown did not answer. He was staring, with a knot
in his forehead, at the landscape; and he suddenly pointed at it. "What's that house over there?" he asked. Following his finger, Flambeau saw for the first time the corners
of a building nearer than the farmhouse, but screened for the most part
with a fringe of trees. It was not a large building, and stood well back
from the shore--, but a glint of ornament on it suggested that it was
part of the same watering-place scheme of decoration as the bandstand,
the little gardens and the curly-backed iron seats. Father Brown jumped off the bandstand, his friend following;
and as they walked in the direction indicated the trees fell away
to right and left, and they saw a small, rather flashy hotel,
such as is common in resorts--the hotel of the Saloon Bar rather than
the Bar Parlour. Almost the whole frontage was of gilt plaster and
figured glass, and between that grey seascape and the grey,
witch-like trees, its gimcrack quality had something spectral
in its melancholy. They both felt vaguely that if any food or drink
were offered at such a hostelry, it would be the paste-board ham
and empty mug of the pantomime. In this, however, they were not altogether confirmed. As they drew
nearer and nearer to the place they saw in front of the buffet,
which was apparently closed, one of the iron garden-seats with curly backs
that had adorned the gardens, but much longer, running almost
the whole length of the frontage. Presumably, it was placed so that
visitors might sit there and look at the sea, but one hardly expected
to find anyone doing it in such weather. Nevertheless, just in front of the extreme end of the iron seat
stood a small round restaurant table, and on this stood
a small bottle of Chablis and a plate of almonds and raisins. Behind the table and on the seat sat a dark-haired young man,
bareheaded, and gazing at the sea in a state of almost
astonishing immobility. But though he might have been a waxwork when they were within
four yards of him, he jumped up like a jack-in-the-box when they
came within three, and said in a deferential, though not undignified,
manner:  "Will you step inside, gentlemen? I have no staff at present,
but I can get you anything simple myself." "Much obliged," said Flambeau. "So you are the proprietor?" "Yes," said the dark man, dropping back a little into
his motionless manner. "My waiters are all Italians, you see,
and I thought it only fair they should see their countryman beat the black,
if he really can do it. You know the great fight between Malvoli and
Nigger Ned is coming off after all?" "I'm afraid we can't wait to trouble your hospitality seriously,"
said Father Brown. "But my friend would be glad of a glass of sherry,
I'm sure, to keep out the cold and drink success to the Latin champion." Flambeau did not understand the sherry, but he did not object to it
in the least. He could only say amiably:  "Oh, thank you very much." "Sherry, sir--certainly," said their host, turning to his hostel. "Excuse me if I detain you a few minutes. As I told you,
I have no staff--" And he went towards the black windows of
his shuttered and unlighted inn. "Oh, it doesn't really matter," began Flambeau, but the man
turned to reassure him. "I have the keys," he said. "I could find my way in the dark." "I didn't mean--" began Father Brown. He was interrupted by a bellowing human voice that came
out of the bowels of the uninhabited hotel. It thundered
some foreign name loudly but inaudibly, and the hotel proprietor
moved more sharply towards it than he had done for Flambeau's sherry. As instant evidence proved, the proprietor had told, then and after,
nothing but the literal truth. But both Flambeau and Father Brown
have often confessed that, in all their (often outrageous) adventures,
nothing had so chilled their blood as that voice of an ogre,
sounding suddenly out of a silent and empty inn. "My cook!" cried the proprietor hastily. "I had forgotten my cook. He will be starting presently. Sherry, sir?" And, sure enough, there appeared in the doorway a big white bulk
with white cap and white apron, as befits a cook, but with
the needless emphasis of a black face. Flambeau had often heard
that negroes made good cooks. But somehow something in the contrast
of colour and caste increased his surprise that the hotel proprietor
should answer the call of the cook, and not the cook the call
of the proprietor. But he reflected that head cooks are proverbially
arrogant; and, besides, the host had come back with the sherry,
and that was the great thing. "I rather wonder," said Father Brown, "that there are so few people
about the beach, when this big fight is coming on after all. We only met one man for miles." The hotel proprietor shrugged his shoulders. "They come from
the other end of the town, you see--from the station, three miles from here. They are only interested in the sport, and will stop in hotels
for the night only. After all, it is hardly weather for
basking on the shore." "Or on the seat," said Flambeau, and pointed to the little table. "I have to keep a look-out," said the man with the motionless face. He was a quiet, well-featured fellow, rather sallow; his dark clothes
had nothing distinctive about them, except that his black necktie
was worn rather high, like a stock, and secured by a gold pin
with some grotesque head to it. Nor was there anything notable
in the face, except something that was probably a mere nervous trick--
a habit of opening one eye more narrowly than the other,
giving the impression that the other was larger, or was,
perhaps, artificial. The silence that ensued was broken by their host saying quietly:
"Whereabouts did you meet the one man on your march?" "Curiously enough," answered the priest, "close by here--
just by that bandstand." Flambeau, who had sat on the long iron seat to finish his sherry,
put it down and rose to his feet, staring at his friend in amazement. He opened his mouth to speak, and then shut it again. "Curious," said the dark-haired man thoughtfully. "What was he like?" "It was rather dark when I saw him," began Father Brown,
"but he was--"

     As has been said, the hotel-keeper can be proved to have told
the precise truth. His phrase that the cook was starting presently
was fulfilled to the letter, for the cook came out, pulling his gloves on,
even as they spoke. But he was a very different figure from the confused mass
of white and black that had appeared for an instant in the doorway. He was buttoned and buckled up to his bursting eyeballs in the most
brilliant fashion. A tall black hat was tilted on his broad black head--
a hat of the sort that the French wit has compared to eight mirrors. But somehow the black man was like the black hat. He also was black,
and yet his glossy skin flung back the light at eight angles or more. It is needless to say that he wore white spats and a white slip inside
his waistcoat. The red flower stood up in his buttonhole aggressively,
as if it had suddenly grown there. And in the way he carried his cane
in one hand and his cigar in the other there was a certain attitude--
an attitude we must always remember when we talk of racial prejudices:
something innocent and insolent--the cake walk. "Sometimes," said Flambeau, looking after him, "I'm not surprised
that they lynch them." "I am never surprised," said Father Brown, "at any work of hell. But as I was saying," he resumed, as the negro, still ostentatiously
pulling on his yellow gloves, betook himself briskly towards
the watering-place, a queer music-hall figure against that grey and
frosty scene--"as I was saying, I couldn't describe the man very minutely,
but he had a flourish and old-fashioned whiskers and moustachios,
dark or dyed, as in the pictures of foreign financiers, round his neck
was wrapped a long purple scarf that thrashed out in the wind as he walked. It was fixed at the throat rather in the way that nurses
fix children's comforters with a safety-pin. Only this,"
added the priest, gazing placidly out to sea, "was not a safety-pin." The man sitting on the long iron bench was also gazing placidly
out to sea. Now he was once more in repose. Flambeau felt quite certain
that one of his eyes was naturally larger than the other. Both were now well opened, and he could almost fancy the left eye
grew larger as he gazed. "It was a very long gold pin, and had the carved head of a monkey
or some such thing," continued the cleric; "and it was fixed
in a rather odd way--he wore pince-nez and a broad black--"

     The motionless man continued to gaze at the sea, and the eyes in
his head might have belonged to two different men. Then he made
a movement of blinding swiftness. Father Brown had his back to him, and in that flash might have
fallen dead on his face. Flambeau had no weapon, but his large
brown hands were resting on the end of the long iron seat. His shoulders abruptly altered their shape, and he heaved
the whole huge thing high over his head, like a headsman's axe
about to fall. The mere height of the thing, as he held it vertical,
looked like a long iron ladder by which he was inviting men to climb
towards the stars. But the long shadow, in the level evening light,
looked like a giant brandishing the Eiffel Tower. It was the shock
of that shadow, before the shock of the iron crash, that made the stranger
quail and dodge, and then dart into his inn, leaving the flat and
shining dagger he had dropped exactly where it had fallen. "We must get away from here instantly," cried Flambeau,
flinging the huge seat away with furious indifference on the beach. He caught the little priest by the elbow and ran him down
a grey perspective of barren back garden, at the end of which there
was a closed back garden door. Flambeau bent over it an instant
in violent silence, and then said:  "The door is locked." As he spoke a black feather from one of the ornamental firs fell,
brushing the brim of his hat. It startled him more than the small
and distant detonation that had come just before. Then came another
distant detonation, and the door he was trying to open shook
under the bullet buried in it. Flambeau's shoulders again filled out
and altered suddenly. Three hinges and a lock burst at the same instant,
and he went out into the empty path behind, carrying the great garden door
with him, as Samson carried the gates of Gaza. Then he flung the garden door over the garden wall, just as
a third shot picked up a spurt of snow and dust behind his heel. Without ceremony he snatched up the little priest, slung him astraddle
on his shoulders, and went racing towards Seawood as fast as
his long legs could carry him. It was not until nearly two miles
farther on that he set his small companion down. It had hardly been
a dignified escape, in spite of the classic model of Anchises,
but Father Brown's face only wore a broad grin. "Well," said Flambeau, after an impatient silence, as they resumed
their more conventional tramp through the streets on the edge of the town,
where no outrage need be feared, "I don't know what all this means,
but I take it I may trust my own eyes that you never met the man
you have so accurately described." "I did meet him in a way," Brown said, biting his finger
rather nervously--"I did really. And it was too dark to see him properly,
because it was under that bandstand affair. But I'm afraid I didn't
describe him so very accurately after all, for his pince-nez
was broken under him, and the long gold pin wasn't stuck through
his purple scarf but through his heart." "And I suppose," said the other in a lower voice, "that glass-eyed guy
had something to do with it." "I had hoped he had only a little," answered Brown
in a rather troubled voice, "and I may have been wrong in what I did. I acted on impulse. But I fear this business has deep roots and dark." They walked on through some streets in silence. The yellow lamps
were beginning to be lit in the cold blue twilight, and they were
evidently approaching the more central parts of the town. Highly coloured bills announcing the glove-fight between Nigger Ned
and Malvoli were slapped about the walls. "Well," said Flambeau, "I never murdered anyone, even in
my criminal days, but I can almost sympathize with anyone doing it
in such a dreary place. Of all God-forsaken dustbins of Nature,
I think the most heart-breaking are places like that bandstand,
that were meant to be festive and are forlorn. I can fancy a morbid man
feeling he must kill his rival in the solitude and irony of such a scene. I remember once taking a tramp in your glorious Surrey hills,
thinking of nothing but gorse and skylarks, when I came out on
a vast circle of land, and over me lifted a vast, voiceless structure,
tier above tier of seats, as huge as a Roman amphitheatre and as empty
as a new letter-rack. A bird sailed in heaven over it. It was
the Grand Stand at Epsom. And I felt that no one would ever
be happy there again." "It's odd you should mention Epsom," said the priest. "Do you remember what was called the Sutton Mystery, because two
suspected men--ice-cream men, I think--happened to live at Sutton? They were eventually released. A man was found strangled, it was said,
on the Downs round that part. As a fact, I know (from an Irish policeman
who is a friend of mine) that he was found close up to the Epsom
Grand Stand--in fact, only hidden by one of the lower doors being
pushed back." "That is queer," assented Flambeau. "But it rather confirms
my view that such pleasure places look awfully lonely out of season,
or the man wouldn't have been murdered there." "I'm not so sure he--" began Brown, and stopped. "Not so sure he was murdered?" queried his companion. "Not so sure he was murdered out of the season," answered
the little priest, with simplicity. "Don't you think there's something
rather tricky about this solitude, Flambeau? Do you feel sure
a wise murderer would always want the spot to be lonely? It's very, very seldom a man is quite alone. And, short of that,
the more alone he is, the more certain he is to be seen. No; I think there must be some other--Why, here we are at
the Pavilion or Palace, or whatever they call it." They had emerged on a small square, brilliantly lighted,
of which the principal building was gay with gilding, gaudy with posters,
and flanked with two giant photographs of Malvoli and Nigger Ned. "Hallo!" cried Flambeau in great surprise, as his clerical friend
stumped straight up the broad steps. "I didn't know pugilism was
your latest hobby. Are you going to see the fight?" "I don't think there will be any fight," replied Father Brown. They passed rapidly through ante-rooms and inner rooms;
they passed through the hall of combat itself, raised, roped,
and padded with innumerable seats and boxes, and still the cleric did
not look round or pause till he came to a clerk at a desk outside
a door marked "Committee". There he stopped and asked to see Lord Pooley. The attendant observed that his lordship was very busy,
as the fight was coming on soon, but Father Brown had a good-tempered
tedium of reiteration for which the official mind is generally not prepared. In a few moments the rather baffled Flambeau found himself in the presence
of a man who was still shouting directions to another man going out of
the room. "Be careful, you know, about the ropes after the fourth--
Well, and what do you want, I wonder!" Lord Pooley was a gentleman, and, like most of the few remaining
to our race, was worried--especially about money. He was half grey
and half flaxen, and he had the eyes of fever and a high-bridged,
frost-bitten nose. "Only a word," said Father Brown. "I have come to prevent
a man being killed." Lord Pooley bounded off his chair as if a spring had
flung him from it. "I'm damned if I'll stand any more of this!" he cried. "You and your committees and parsons and petitions! Weren't there parsons in the old days, when they fought without gloves? Now they're fighting with the regulation gloves, and there's not
the rag of a possibility of either of the boxers being killed." "I didn't mean either of the boxers," said the little priest. "Well, well, well!" said the nobleman, with a touch of frosty humour. "Who's going to be killed? The referee?" "I don't know who's going to be killed," replied Father Brown,
with a reflective stare. "If I did I shouldn't have to
spoil your pleasure. I could simply get him to escape. I never could see anything wrong about prize-fights. As it is,
I must ask you to announce that the fight is off for the present." "Anything else?" jeered the gentleman with feverish eyes. "And what do you say to the two thousand people who have come to see it?" "I say there will be one thousand nine-hundred and ninety-nine
of them left alive when they have seen it," said Father Brown. Lord Pooley looked at Flambeau. "Is your friend mad?" he asked. "Far from it," was the reply. "And took here," resumed Pooley in his restless way,
"it's worse than that. A whole pack of Italians have turned up
to back Malvoli--swarthy, savage fellows of some country, anyhow. You know what these Mediterranean races are like. If I send out word
that it's off we shall have Malvoli storming in here at the head of
a whole Corsican clan." "My lord, it is a matter of life and death," said the priest. "Ring your bell. Give your message. And see whether it is Malvoli
who answers." The nobleman struck the bell on the table with an odd air
of new curiosity. He said to the clerk who appeared almost instantly
in the doorway:  "I have a serious announcement to make to the audience
shortly. Meanwhile, would you kindly tell the two champions that
the fight will have to be put off." The clerk stared for some seconds as if at a demon and vanished. "What authority have you for what you say?" asked Lord Pooley
abruptly. "Whom did you consult?" "I consulted a bandstand," said Father Brown, scratching his head. "But, no, I'm wrong; I consulted a book, too. I  picked it up
on a bookstall in London--very cheap, too." He had taken out of his pocket a small, stout, leather-bound volume,
and Flambeau, looking over his shoulder, could see that it was some
book of old travels, and had a leaf turned down for reference. "`The only form in which Voodoo--'" began Father Brown, reading aloud. "In which what?" inquired his lordship. "`In which Voodoo,'" repeated the reader, almost with relish,
"`is widely organized outside Jamaica itself is in the form known as
the Monkey, or the God of the Gongs, which is powerful in many parts of
the two American continents, especially among half-breeds, many of whom
look exactly like white men. It differs from most other forms
of devil-worship and human sacrifice in the fact that the blood
is not shed formally on the altar, but by a sort of assassination
among the crowd. The gongs beat with a deafening din as
the doors of the shrine open and the monkey-god is revealed;
almost the whole congregation rivet ecstatic eyes on him. But after--'"

     The door of the room was flung open, and the fashionable negro
stood framed in it, his eyeballs rolling, his silk hat still insolently
tilted on his head. "Huh!" he cried, showing his apish teeth. "What this? Huh! Huh! You steal a coloured gentleman's prize--
prize his already--yo' think yo' jes' save that white 'Talian trash--"

     "The matter is only deferred," said the nobleman quietly. "I will be with you to explain in a minute or two." "Who you to--" shouted Nigger Ned, beginning to storm. "My name is Pooley," replied the other, with a creditable coolness. "I am the organizing secretary, and I advise you just now
to leave the room." "Who this fellow?" demanded the dark champion, pointing to the
priest disdainfully. "My name is Brown," was the reply. "And I advise you just now
to leave the country." The prize-fighter stood glaring for a few seconds, and then,
rather to the surprise of Flambeau and the others, strode out,
sending the door to with a crash behind him. "Well," asked Father Brown rubbing his dusty hair up,
"what do you think of Leonardo da Vinci? A beautiful Italian head." "Look here," said Lord Pooley, "I've taken a considerable responsibility,
on your bare word. I think you ought to tell me more about this." "You are quite right, my lord," answered Brown. "And it won't take
long to tell." He put the little leather book in his overcoat pocket. "I think we know all that this can tell us, but you shall look at it
to see if I'm right. That negro who has just swaggered out is one of
the most dangerous men on earth, for he has the brains of a European,
with the instincts of a cannibal. He has turned what was clean,
common-sense butchery among his fellow-barbarians into a very modern
and scientific secret society of assassins. He doesn't know I know it,
nor, for the matter of that, that I can't prove it." There was a silence, and the little man went on. "But if I want to murder somebody, will it really be the best plan
to make sure I'm alone with him?" Lord Pooley's eyes recovered their frosty twinkle as he
looked at the little clergyman. He only said:  "If you want to
murder somebody, I should advise it." Father Brown shook his head, like a murderer of much riper experience. "So Flambeau said," he replied, with a sigh. "But consider. The more a man feels lonely the less he can be sure he is alone. It must mean empty spaces round him, and they are just what
make him obvious. Have you never seen one ploughman from the heights,
or one shepherd from the valleys? Have you never walked along a cliff,
and seen one man walking along the sands? Didn't you know when he's
killed a crab, and wouldn't you have known if it had been a creditor? No! No! No! For an intelligent murderer, such as you or I might be,
it is an impossible plan to make sure that nobody is looking at you." "But what other plan is there?" "There is only one," said the priest. "To make sure
that everybody is looking at something else. A man is throttled
close by the big stand at Epsom. Anybody might have seen it done
while the stand stood empty--any tramp under the hedges or motorist
among the hills. But nobody would have seen it when the stand
was crowded and the whole ring roaring, when the favourite was
coming in first--or wasn't. The twisting of a neck-cloth,
the thrusting of a body behind a door could be done in an instant--
so long as it was that instant. It was the same, of course,"
he continued turning to Flambeau, "with that poor fellow
under the bandstand. He was dropped through the hole (it wasn't
an accidental hole) just at some very dramatic moment of the entertainment,
when the bow of some great violinist or the voice of some great singer
opened or came to its climax. And here, of course, when the knock-out
blow came--it would not be the only one. That is the little trick
Nigger Ned has adopted from his old God of Gongs." "By the way, Malvoli--" Pooley began. "Malvoli," said the priest, "has nothing to do with it. I dare say he has some Italians with him, but our amiable friends
are not Italians. They are octoroons and African half-bloods
of various shades, but I fear we English think all foreigners
are much the same so long as they are dark and dirty. Also,"
he added, with a smile, "I fear the English decline to draw
any fine distinction between the moral character produced by my religion
and that which blooms out of Voodoo." The blaze of the spring season had burst upon Seawood,
littering its foreshore with famines and bathing-machines,
with nomadic preachers and nigger minstrels, before the two friends
saw it again, and long before the storm of pursuit after the strange
secret society had died away. Almost on every hand the secret
of their purpose perished with them. The man of the hotel was found
drifting dead on the sea like so much seaweed; his right eye was
closed in peace, but his left eye was wide open, and glistened like glass
in the moon. Nigger Ned had been overtaken a mile or two away,
and murdered three policemen with his closed left hand. The remaining officer was surprised--nay, pained--and the negro got away. But this was enough to set all the English papers in a flame,
and for a month or two the main purpose of the British Empire was
to prevent the buck nigger (who was so in both senses) escaping by any
English port. Persons of a figure remotely reconcilable with his
were subjected to quite extraordinary inquisitions, made to scrub
their faces before going on board ship, as if each white complexion
were made up like a mask, of greasepaint. Every negro in England
was put under special regulations and made to report himself;
the outgoing ships would no more have taken a nigger than a basilisk. For people had found out how fearful and vast and silent was
the force of the savage secret society, and by the time Flambeau and
Father Brown were leaning on the parade parapet in April, the Black Man
meant in England almost what he once meant in Scotland. "He must be still in England," observed Flambeau, "and horridly
well hidden, too. They must have found him at the ports if he had
only whitened his face." "You see, he is really a clever man," said Father Brown
apologetically. "And I'm sure he wouldn't whiten his face." "Well, but what would he do?" "I think," said Father Brown, "he would blacken his face." Flambeau, leaning motionless on the parapet, laughed and said:
"My dear fellow!" Father Brown, also leaning motionless on the parapet, moved one finger
for an instant into the direction of the soot-masked niggers singing
on the sands. X. The Salad of Colonel Cray


FATHER BROWN was walking home from Mass on a white weird morning
when the mists were slowly lifting--one of those mornings when
the very element of light appears as something mysterious and new. The scattered trees outlined themselves more and more out of the vapour,
as if they were first drawn in grey chalk and then in charcoal. At yet more distant intervals appeared the houses upon the broken fringe
of the suburb; their outlines became clearer and clearer until
he recognized many in which he had chance acquaintances, and many more
the names of whose owners he knew. But all the windows and doors
were sealed; none of the people were of the sort that would be up
at such a time, or still less on such an errand. But as he passed under
the shadow of one handsome villa with verandas and wide ornate gardens,
he heard a noise that made him almost involuntarily stop. It was the unmistakable noise of a pistol or carbine or some
light firearm discharged; but it was not this that puzzled him most. The first full noise was immediately followed by a series of fainter noises--
as he counted them, about six. He supposed it must be the echo;
but the odd thing was that the echo was not in the least like
the original sound. It was not like anything else that he could think of;
the three things nearest to it seemed to be the noise made by
siphons of soda-water, one of the many noises made by an animal,
and the noise made by a person attempting to conceal laughter. None of which seemed to make much sense. Father Brown was made of two men. There was a man of action,
who was as modest as a primrose and as punctual as a clock;
who went his small round of duties and never dreamed of altering it. There was also a man of reflection, who was much simpler but much stronger,
who could not easily be stopped; whose thought was always (in the only
intelligent sense of the words) free thought. He could not help,
even unconsciously, asking himself all the questions that
there were to be asked, and answering as many of them as he could;
all that went on like his breathing or circulation. But he never
consciously carried his actions outside the sphere of his own duty;
and in this case the two attitudes were aptly tested. He was just about
to resume his trudge in the twilight, telling himself it was no affair
of his, but instinctively twisting and untwisting twenty theories
about what the odd noises might mean. Then the grey sky-line
brightened into silver, and in the broadening light he realized
that he had been to the house which belonged to an Anglo-Indian Major
named Putnam; and that the Major had a native cook from Malta who was
of his communion. He also began to remember that pistol-shots
are sometimes serious things; accompanied with consequences with which
he was legitimately concerned. He turned back and went in
at the garden gate, making for the front door. Half-way down one side of the house stood out a projection
like a very low shed; it was, as he afterwards discovered,
a large dustbin. Round the corner of this came a figure,
at first a mere shadow in the haze, apparently bending and peering about. Then, coming nearer, it solidified into a figure that was, indeed,
rather unusually solid. Major Putnam was a bald-headed, bull-necked man,
short and very broad, with one of those rather apoplectic faces
that are produced by a prolonged attempt to combine the oriental climate
with the occidental luxuries. But the face was a good-humoured one,
and even now, though evidently puzzled and inquisitive, wore a kind of
innocent grin. He had a large palm-leaf hat on the back of his head
(suggesting a halo that was by no means appropriate to the face),
but otherwise he was clad only in a very vivid suit of striped scarlet
and yellow pyjamas; which, though glowing enough to behold, must have been,
on a fresh morning, pretty chilly to wear. He had evidently
come out of his house in a hurry, and the priest was not surprised
when he called out without further ceremony:  "Did you hear that noise?" "Yes," answered Father Brown; "I thought I had better look in,
in case anything was the matter." The Major looked at him rather queerly with his good-humoured
gooseberry eyes. "What do you think the noise was?" he asked. "It sounded like a gun or something," replied the other,
with some hesitation; "but it seemed to have a singular sort of echo." The Major was still looking at him quietly, but with protruding eyes,
when the front door was flung open, releasing a flood of gaslight
on the face of the fading mist; and another figure in pyjamas sprang
or tumbled out into the garden. The figure was much longer, leaner,
and more athletic; the pyjamas, though equally tropical, were
comparatively tasteful, being of white with a light lemon-yellow stripe. The man was haggard, but handsome, more sunburned than the other;
he had an aquiline profile and rather deep-sunken eyes, and a slight air
of oddity arising from the combination of coal-black hair with
a much lighter moustache. All this Father Brown absorbed in detail
more at leisure. For the moment he only saw one thing about the man;
which was the revolver in his hand. "Cray!" exclaimed the Major, staring at him; "did you fire that shot?" "Yes, I did," retorted the black-haired gentleman hotly;
"and so would you in my place. If you were chased everywhere
by devils and nearly--"

     The Major seemed to intervene rather hurriedly. "This is my friend
Father Brown," he said. And then to Brown:  "I don't know whether
you've met Colonel Cray of the Royal Artillery." "I have heard of him, of course," said the priest innocently. "Did you--did you hit anything?" "I thought so," answered Cray with gravity. "Did he--" asked Major Putnam in a lowered voice, "did he fall
or cry out, or anything?" Colonel Cray was regarding his host with a strange and steady stare. "I'll tell you exactly what he did," he said. "He sneezed." Father Brown's hand went half-way to his head, with the gesture
of a man remembering somebody's name. He knew now what it was
that was neither soda-water nor the snorting of a dog. "Well," ejaculated the staring Major, "I never heard before
that a service revolver was a thing to be sneezed at." "Nor I," said Father Brown faintly. "It's lucky you didn't
turn your artillery on him or you might have given him quite a bad cold." Then, after a bewildered pause, he said:  "Was it a burglar?" "Let us go inside," said Major Putnam, rather sharply,
and led the way into his house. The interior exhibited a paradox often to be marked in such
morning hours:  that the rooms seemed brighter than the sky outside;
even after the Major had turned out the one gaslight in the front hall. Father Brown was surprised to see the whole dining-table set out
as for a festive meal, with napkins in their rings, and wine-glasses
of some six unnecessary shapes set beside every plate. It was common enough,
at that time of the morning, to find the remains of a banquet over-night;
but to find it freshly spread so early was unusual. While he stood wavering in the hall Major Putnam rushed past him
and sent a raging eye over the whole oblong of the tablecloth. At last he spoke, spluttering:  "All the silver gone!" he gasped. "Fish-knives and forks gone. Old cruet-stand gone. Even the old silver
cream-jug gone. And now, Father Brown, I am ready to answer your question
of whether it was a burglar." "They're simply a blind," said Cray stubbornly. "I know better
than you why people persecute this house; I know better than you why--"

     The Major patted him on the shoulder with a gesture almost peculiar
to the soothing of a sick child, and said:  "It was a burglar. Obviously it was a burglar." "A burglar with a bad cold," observed Father Brown, "that might
assist you to trace him in the neighbourhood." The Major shook his head in a sombre manner. "He must be far beyond
trace now, I fear," he said. Then, as the restless man with the revolver turned again towards
the door in the garden, he added in a husky, confidential voice:
"I doubt whether I should send for the police, for fear my friend here
has been a little too free with his bullets, and got on the wrong side
of the law. He's lived in very wild places; and, to be frank with you,
I think he sometimes fancies things." "I think you once told me," said Brown, "that he believes some
Indian secret society is pursuing him." Major Putnam nodded, but at the same time shrugged his shoulders. "I suppose we'd better follow him outside," he said. "I don't want
any more--shall we say, sneezing?" They passed out into the morning light, which was now even tinged
with sunshine, and saw Colonel Cray's tall figure bent almost double,
minutely examining the condition of gravel and grass. While the Major
strolled unobtrusively towards him, the priest took an equally
indolent turn, which took him round the next corner of the house
to within a yard or two of the projecting dustbin. He stood regarding this dismal object for some minute and a half--,
then he stepped towards it, lifted the lid and put his head inside. Dust and other discolouring matter shook upwards as he did so;
but Father Brown never observed his own appearance, whatever else
he observed. He remained thus for a measurable period, as if engaged
in some mysterious prayers. Then he came out again, with some ashes
on his hair, and walked unconcernedly away. By the time he came round to the garden door again he found
a group there which seemed to roll away morbidities as the sunlight
had already rolled away the mists. It was in no way rationally reassuring;
it was simply broadly comic, like a cluster of Dickens's characters. Major Putnam had managed to slip inside and plunge into a proper shirt and
trousers, with a crimson cummerbund, and a light square jacket over all;
thus normally set off, his red festive face seemed bursting with
a commonplace cordiality. He was indeed emphatic, but then he was talking
to his cook--the swarthy son of Malta, whose lean, yellow and rather
careworn face contrasted quaintly with his snow-white cap and costume. The cook might well be careworn, for cookery was the Major's hobby. He was one of those amateurs who always know more than the professional. The only other person he even admitted to be a judge of an omelette
was his friend Cray--and as Brown remembered this, he turned to look
for the other officer. In the new presence of daylight and people clothed
and in their right mind, the sight of him was rather a shock. The taller and more elegant man was still in his night-garb,
with tousled black hair, and now crawling about the garden on his hands
and knees, still looking for traces of the burglar; and now and again,
to all appearance, striking the ground with his hand in anger at not
finding him. Seeing him thus quadrupedal in the grass, the priest
raised his eyebrows rather sadly; and for the first time guessed that
"fancies things" might be an euphemism. The third item in the group of the cook and the epicure was also
known to Father Brown; it was Audrey Watson, the Major's ward
and housekeeper; and at this moment, to judge by her apron,
tucked-up sleeves and resolute manner, much more the housekeeper
than the ward. "It serves you right," she was saying:  "I always told you
not to have that old-fashioned cruet-stand." "I prefer it," said Putnam, placably. "I'm old-fashioned myself;
and the things keep together." "And vanish together, as you see," she retorted. "Well, if you are
not going to bother about the burglar, I shouldn't bother about the lunch. It's Sunday, and we can't send for vinegar and all that in the town;
and you Indian gentlemen can't enjoy what you call a dinner without
a lot of hot things. I wish to goodness now you hadn't asked
Cousin Oliver to take me to the musical service. It isn't over
till half-past twelve, and the Colonel has to leave by then. I don't believe you men can manage alone." "Oh yes, we can, my dear," said the Major, looking at her
very amiably. "Marco has all the sauces, and we've often
done ourselves well in very rough places, as you might know by now. And it's time you had a treat, Audrey; you mustn't be a housekeeper
every hour of the day; and I know you want to hear the music." "I want to go to church," she said, with rather severe eyes. She was one of those handsome women who will always be handsome,
because the beauty is not in an air or a tint, but in the very structure
of the head and features. But though she was not yet middle-aged
and her auburn hair was of a Titianesque fullness in form and colour,
there was a look in her mouth and around her eyes which suggested that
some sorrows wasted her, as winds waste at last the edges of a Greek temple. For indeed the little domestic difficulty of which she was now speaking
so decisively was rather comic than tragic. Father Brown gathered,
from the course of the conversation, that Cray, the other gourmet,
had to leave before the usual lunch-time; but that Putnam, his host,
not to be done out of a final feast with an old crony, had arranged
for a special dejeuner to be set out and consumed in the course of
the morning, while Audrey and other graver persons were at morning service. She was going there under the escort of a relative and old friend of hers,
Dr Oliver Oman, who, though a scientific man of a somewhat bitter type,
was enthusiastic for music, and would go even to church to get it. There was nothing in all this that could conceivably concern
the tragedy in Miss Watson's face; and by a half conscious instinct,
Father Brown turned again to the seeming lunatic grubbing about
in the grass. When he strolled across to him, the black, unbrushed head was
lifted abruptly, as if in some surprise at his continued presence. And indeed, Father Brown, for reasons best known to himself,
had lingered much longer than politeness required; or even,
in the ordinary sense, permitted. "Well!" cried Cray, with wild eyes. "I suppose you think I'm mad,
like the rest?" "I have considered the thesis," answered the little man, composedly. "And I incline to think you are not." "What do you mean?" snapped Cray quite savagely. "Real madmen," explained Father Brown, "always encourage their
own morbidity. They never strive against it. But you are trying
to find traces of the burglar; even when there aren't any. You are struggling against it. You want what no madman ever wants." "And what is that?" "You want to be proved wrong," said Brown. During the last words Cray had sprung or staggered to his feet
and was regarding the cleric with agitated eyes. "By hell,
but that is a true word!" he cried. "They are all at me here
that the fellow was only after the silver--as if I shouldn't be
only too pleased to think so! She's been at me," and he tossed his tousled
black head towards Audrey, but the other had no need of the direction,
"she's been at me today about how cruel I was to shoot a poor harmless
house-breaker, and how I have the devil in me against poor harmless natives. But I was a good-natured man once--as good-natured as Putnam." After a pause he said:  "Look here, I've never seen you before;
but you shall judge of the whole story. Old Putnam and I were friends
in the same mess; but, owing to some accidents on the Afghan border,
I got my command much sooner than most men; only we were both
invalided home for a bit. I was engaged to Audrey out there;
and we all travelled back together. But on the journey back
things happened. Curious things. The result of them was
that Putnam wants it broken off, and even Audrey keeps it hanging on--
and I know what they mean. I know what they think I am. So do you. "Well, these are the facts. The last day we were in
an Indian city I asked Putnam if I could get some Trichinopoli cigars,
he directed me to a little place opposite his lodgings. I have since found he was quite right; but `opposite' is a dangerous word
when one decent house stands opposite five or six squalid ones;
and I must have mistaken the door. It opened with difficulty,
and then only on darkness; but as I turned back, the door behind me
sank back and settled into its place with a noise as of innumerable bolts. There was nothing to do but to walk forward; which I did through
passage after passage, pitch-dark. Then I came to a flight of steps,
and then to a blind door, secured by a latch of elaborate Eastern ironwork,
which I could only trace by touch, but which I loosened at last. I came out again upon gloom, which was half turned into
a greenish twilight by a multitude of small but steady lamps below. They showed merely the feet or fringes of some huge and empty architecture. Just in front of me was something that looked like a mountain. I confess I nearly fell on the great stone platform on which I had emerged,
to realize that it was an idol. And worst of all, an idol with
its back to me. "It was hardly half human, I guessed; to judge by the small squat head,
and still more by a thing like a tail or extra limb turned up behind
and pointing, like a loathsome large finger, at some symbol graven
in the centre of the vast stone back. I had begun, in the dim light,
to guess at the hieroglyphic, not without horror, when a more horrible
thing happened. A door opened silently in the temple wall
behind me and a man came out, with a brown face and a black coat. He had a carved smile on his face, of copper flesh and ivory teeth;
but I think the most hateful thing about him was that he was
in European dress. I was prepared, I think, for shrouded priests
or naked fakirs. But this seemed to say that the devilry was
over all the earth. As indeed I found it to be. "`If you had only seen the Monkey's Feet,' he said, smiling steadily,
and without other preface, `we should have been very gentle--
you would only be tortured and die. If you had seen the Monkey's Face,
still we should be very moderate, very tolerant--you would only
be tortured and live. But as you have seen the Monkey's Tail,
we must pronounce the worst sentence. which is--Go Free.' "When he said the words I heard the elaborate iron latch with
which I had struggled, automatically unlock itself:  and then,
far down the dark passages I had passed, I heard the heavy street-door
shifting its own bolts backwards. "`It is vain to ask for mercy; you must go free,' said
the smiling man. `Henceforth a hair shall slay you like a sword,
and a breath shall bite you like an adder; weapons shall come
against you out of nowhere; and you shall die many times.' And with that he was swallowed once more in the wall behind;
and I went out into the street." Cray paused; and Father Brown unaffectedly sat down on the lawn
and began to pick daisies. Then the soldier continued:  "Putnam, of course, with his
jolly common sense, pooh-poohed all my fears; and from that time
dates his doubt of my mental balance. Well, I'll simply tell you,
in the fewest words, the three things that have happened since;
and you shall judge which of us is right. "The first happened in an Indian village on the edge of the jungle,
but hundreds of miles from the temple, or town, or type of tribes
and customs where the curse had been put on me. I woke in black midnight,
and lay thinking of nothing in particular, when I felt a faint
tickling thing, like a thread or a hair, trailed across my throat. I shrank back out of its way, and could not help thinking of the words
in the temple. But when I got up and sought lights and a mirror,
the line across my neck was a line of blood. "The second happened in a lodging in Port Said, later,
on our journey home together. It was a jumble of tavern
and curiosity-shop; and though there was nothing there remotely suggesting
the cult of the Monkey, it is, of course, possible that some of its
images or talismans were in such a place. Its curse was there, anyhow. I woke again in the dark with a sensation that could not be put
in colder or more literal words than that a breath bit like an adder. Existence was an agony of extinction; I dashed my head against walls
until I dashed it against a window; and fell rather than jumped
into the garden below. Putnam, poor fellow, who had called the other thing
a chance scratch, was bound to take seriously the fact of finding me
half insensible on the grass at dawn. But I fear it was my mental state
he took seriously; and not my story. "The third happened in Malta. We were in a fortress there;
and as it happened our bedrooms overlooked the open sea, which almost
came up to our window-sills, save for a flat white outer wall
as bare as the sea. I woke up again; but it was not dark. There was a full moon, as I walked to the window; I could have seen a bird
on the bare battlement, or a sail on the horizon. What I did see
was a sort of stick or branch circling, self-supported, in the empty sky. It flew straight in at my window and smashed the lamp beside the pillow
I had just quitted. It was one of those queer-shaped war-clubs
some Eastern tribes use. But it had come from no human hand." Father Brown threw away a daisy-chain he was making,
and rose with a wistful look. "Has Major Putnam," he asked,
"got any Eastern curios, idols, weapons and so on, from which
one might get a hint?" "Plenty of those, though not much use, I fear," replied Cray;
"but by all means come into his study." As they entered they passed Miss Watson buttoning her gloves for church,
and heard the voice of Putnam downstairs still giving a lecture on cookery
to the cook. In the Major's study and den of curios they came suddenly
on a third party, silk-hatted and dressed for the street, who was
poring over an open book on the smoking-table--a book which he dropped
rather guiltily, and turned. Cray introduced him civilly enough, as Dr Oman, but he showed
such disfavour in his very face that Brown guessed the two men,
whether Audrey knew it or not, were rivals. Nor was the priest
wholly unsympathetic with the prejudice. Dr Oman was a very well-dressed
gentleman indeed; well-featured, though almost dark enough for an Asiatic. But Father Brown had to tell himself sharply that one should be in charity
even with those who wax their pointed beards, who have small gloved hands,
and who speak with perfectly modulated voices. Cray seemed to find something specially irritating in
the small prayer-book in Oman's dark-gloved hand. "I didn't know
that was in your line," he said rather rudely. Oman laughed mildly, but without offence. "This is more so, I know,"
he said, laying his hand on the big book he had dropped,
"a dictionary of drugs and such things. But it's rather too large
to take to church." Then he closed the larger book, and there seemed
again the faintest touch of hurry and embarrassment. "I suppose," said the priest, who seemed anxious to change the subject,
"all these spears and things are from India?" "From everywhere," answered the doctor. "Putnam is an old soldier,
and has been in Mexico and Australia, and the Cannibal Islands
for all I know." "I hope it was not in the Cannibal Islands," said Brown,
"that he learnt the art of cookery." And he ran his eyes over
the stew-pots or other strange utensils on the wall. At this moment the jolly subject of their conversation
thrust his laughing, lobsterish face into the room. "Come along, Cray,"
he cried. "Your lunch is just coming in. And the bells are ringing
for those who want to go to church." Cray slipped upstairs to change; Dr Oman and Miss Watson betook
themselves solemnly down the street, with a string of other churchgoers;
but Father Brown noticed that the doctor twice looked back
and scrutinized the house; and even came back to the corner of the street
to look at it again. The priest looked puzzled. "He can't have been at the dustbin,"
he muttered. "Not in those clothes. Or was he there earlier today?" Father Brown, touching other people, was as sensitive as a barometer;
but today he seemed about as sensitive as a rhinoceros. By no social law,
rigid or implied, could he be supposed to linger round the lunch
of the Anglo-Indian friends; but he lingered, covering his position
with torrents of amusing but quite needless conversation. He was the more puzzling because he did not seem to want any lunch. As one after another of the most exquisitely balanced kedgerees of curries,
accompanied with their appropriate vintages, were laid before
the other two, he only repeated that it was one of his fast-days,
and munched a piece of bread and sipped and then left untasted
a tumbler of cold water. His talk, however, was exuberant. "I'll tell you what I'll do for you," he cried--, "I'll mix you
a salad! I can't eat it, but I'll mix it like an angel! You've got a lettuce there." "Unfortunately it's the only thing we have got," answered
the good-humoured Major. "You must remember that mustard, vinegar,
oil and so on vanished with the cruet and the burglar." "I know," replied Brown, rather vaguely. "That's what I've always
been afraid would happen. That's why I always carry a cruet-stand
about with me. I'm so fond of salads." And to the amazement of the two men he took a pepper-pot out of
his waistcoat pocket and put it on the table. "I wonder why the burglar wanted mustard, too," he went on,
taking a mustard-pot from another pocket. "A mustard plaster,
I suppose. And vinegar"--and producing that condiment--
"haven't I heard something about vinegar and brown paper? As for oil, which I think I put in my left--"

     His garrulity was an instant arrested; for lifting his eyes,
he saw what no one else saw--the black figure of Dr Oman standing
on the sunlit lawn and looking steadily into the room. Before he could
quite recover himself Cray had cloven in. "You're an astounding card," he said, staring. "I shall come
and hear your sermons, if they're as amusing as your manners." His voice changed a little, and he leaned back in his chair. "Oh, there are sermons in a cruet-stand, too," said Father Brown,
quite gravely. "Have you heard of faith like a grain of mustard-seed;
or charity that anoints with oil? And as for vinegar, can any soldiers
forget that solitary soldier, who, when the sun was darkened--"

     Colonel Cray leaned forward a little and clutched the tablecloth. Father Brown, who was making the salad, tipped two spoonfuls
of the mustard into the tumbler of water beside him; stood up and said
in a new, loud and sudden voice--"Drink that!" At the same moment the motionless doctor in the garden came running,
and bursting open a window cried:  "Am I wanted? Has he been poisoned?" "Pretty near," said Brown, with the shadow of a smile; for
the emetic had very suddenly taken effect. And Cray lay in a deck-chair,
gasping as for life, but alive. Major Putnam had sprung up, his purple face mottled. "A crime!" he cried hoarsely. "I will go for the police!" The priest could hear him dragging down his palm-leaf hat from the peg
and tumbling out of the front door; he heard the garden gate slam. But he only stood looking at Cray; and after a silence said quietly:

     "I shall not talk to you much; but I will tell you what
you want to know. There is no curse on you. The Temple of the Monkey
was either a coincidence or a part of the trick; the trick was
the trick of a white man. There is only one weapon that will bring blood
with that mere feathery touch:  a razor held by a white man. There is one way of making a common room full of invisible,
overpowering poison:  turning on the gas--the crime of a white man. And there is only one kind of club that can be thrown out of a window,
turn in mid-air and come back to the window next to it:
the Australian boomerang. You'll see some of them in the Major's study." With that he went outside and spoke for a moment to the doctor. The moment after, Audrey Watson came rushing into the house and
fell on her knees beside Cray's chair. He could not hear what they said
to each other; but their faces moved with amazement, not unhappiness. The doctor and the priest walked slowly towards the garden gate. "I suppose the Major was in love with her, too," he said with a sigh;
and when the other nodded, observed:  "You were very generous, doctor. You did a fine thing. But what made you suspect?" "A very small thing," said Oman; "but it kept me restless in church
till I came back to see that all was well. That book on his table
was a work on poisons; and was put down open at the place where it stated
that a certain Indian poison, though deadly and difficult to trace,
was particularly easily reversible by the use of the commonest emetics. I suppose he read that at the last moment--"

     "And remembered that there were emetics in the cruet-stand,"
said Father Brown. "Exactly. He threw the cruet in the dustbin--
where I found it, along with other silver--for the sake of
a burglary blind. But if you look at that pepper-pot I put on the table,
you'll see a small hole. That's where Cray's bullet struck,
shaking up the pepper and making the criminal sneeze." There was a silence. Then Dr Oman said grimly:  "The Major is
a long time looking for the police." "Or the police in looking for the Major?" said the priest. "Well, good-bye." XI. The Strange Crime of John Boulnois


MR CALHOUN KIDD was a very young gentleman with a very old face,
a face dried up with its own eagerness, framed in blue-black hair
and a black butterfly tie. He was the emissary in England
of the colossal American daily called the Western Sun--
also humorously described as the "Rising Sunset". This was in allusion
to a great journalistic declaration (attributed to Mr Kidd himself)
that "he guessed the sun would rise in the west yet, if American citizens
did a bit more hustling." Those, however, who mock American journalism
from the standpoint of somewhat mellower traditions forget
a certain paradox which partly redeems it. For while the journalism
of the States permits a pantomimic vulgarity long past anything English,
it also shows a real excitement about the most earnest mental problems,
of which English papers are innocent, or rather incapable. The Sun was full of the most solemn matters treated in the most
farcical way. William James figured there as well as "Weary Willie,"
and pragmatists alternated with pugilists in the long procession
of its portraits. Thus, when a very unobtrusive Oxford man named John Boulnois
wrote in a very unreadable review called the Natural Philosophy Quarterly
a series of articles on alleged weak points in Darwinian evolution,
it fluttered no corner of the English papers; though Boulnois's theory
(which was that of a comparatively stationary universe visited occasionally
by convulsions of change) had some rather faddy fashionableness at Oxford,
and got so far as to be named "Catastrophism". But many American papers
seized on the challenge as a great event; and the Sun threw
the shadow of Mr Boulnois quite gigantically across its pages. By the paradox already noted, articles of valuable intelligence and
enthusiasm were presented with headlines apparently written
by an illiterate maniac, headlines such as "Darwin Chews Dirt;
Critic Boulnois says He Jumps the Shocks"--or "Keep Catastrophic,
says Thinker Boulnois." And Mr Calhoun Kidd, of the Western Sun,
was bidden to take his butterfly tie and lugubrious visage down to
the little house outside Oxford where Thinker Boulnois lived
in happy ignorance of such a title. That fated philosopher had consented, in a somewhat dazed manner,
to receive the interviewer, and had named the hour of nine that evening. The last of a summer sunset clung about Cumnor and the low wooded hills;
the romantic Yankee was both doubtful of his road and inquisitive
about his surroundings; and seeing the door of a genuine feudal
old-country inn, The Champion Arms, standing open, he went in
to make inquiries. In the bar parlour he rang the bell, and had to wait
some little time for a reply to it. The only other person present
was a lean man with close red hair and loose, horsey-looking clothes,
who was drinking very bad whisky, but smoking a very good cigar. The whisky, of course, was the choice brand of The Champion Arms;
the cigar he had probably brought with him from London. Nothing could be more different than his cynical negligence from
the dapper dryness of the young American; but something in his pencil
and open notebook, and perhaps in the expression of his alert blue eye,
caused Kidd to guess, correctly, that he was a brother journalist. "Could you do me the favour," asked Kidd, with the courtesy of
his nation, "of directing me to the Grey Cottage, where Mr Boulnois lives,
as I understand?" "It's a few yards down the road," said the red-haired man,
removing his cigar; "I shall be passing it myself in a minute,
but I'm going on to Pendragon Park to try and see the fun." "What is Pendragon Park?" asked Calhoun Kidd. "Sir Claude Champion's place--haven't you come down for that, too?" asked the other pressman, looking up. "You're a journalist, aren't you?" "I have come to see Mr Boulnois," said Kidd. "I've come to see Mrs Boulnois," replied the other. "But I shan't catch her at home." And he laughed rather unpleasantly. "Are you interested in Catastrophism?" asked the wondering Yankee. "I'm interested in catastrophes; and there are going to be some,"
replied his companion gloomily. "Mine's a filthy trade,
and I never pretend it isn't." With that he spat on the floor; yet somehow in the very act and
instant one could realize that the man had been brought up as a gentleman. The American pressman considered him with more attention. His face was pale and dissipated, with the promise of formidable passions
yet to be loosed; but it was a clever and sensitive face; his clothes
were coarse and careless, but he had a good seal ring on one of his long,
thin fingers. His name, which came out in the course of talk,
was James Dalroy; he was the son of a bankrupt Irish landlord,
and attached to a pink paper which he heartily despised, called
Smart Society, in the capacity of reporter and of something
painfully like a spy. Smart Society, I regret to say, felt none of that interest in
Boulnois on Darwin which was such a credit to the head and hearts of
the Western Sun. Dalroy had come down, it seemed, to snuff up
the scent of a scandal which might very well end in the Divorce Court,
but which was at present hovering between Grey Cottage and Pendragon Park. Sir Claude Champion was known to the readers of the Western Sun
as well as Mr Boulnois. So were the Pope and the Derby Winner;
but the idea of their intimate acquaintanceship would have struck Kidd
as equally incongruous. He had heard of (and written about,
nay, falsely pretended to know) Sir Claude Champion, as
"one of the brightest and wealthiest of England's Upper Ten";
as the great sportsman who raced yachts round the world;
as the great traveller who wrote books about the Himalayas,
as the politician who swept constituencies with a startling sort of
Tory Democracy, and as the great dabbler in art, music, literature,
and, above all, acting. Sir Claude was really rather magnificent in
other than American eyes. There was something of the Renascence Prince
about his omnivorous culture and restless publicity--, he was not only
a great amateur, but an ardent one. There was in him none of that
antiquarian frivolity that we convey by the word "dilettante". That faultless falcon profile with purple-black Italian eye,
which had been snap-shotted so often both for Smart Society and
the Western Sun, gave everyone the impression of a man eaten by ambition
as by a fire, or even a disease. But though Kidd knew a great deal
about Sir Claude--a great deal more, in fact, than there was to know--
it would never have crossed his wildest dreams to connect so showy
an aristocrat with the newly-unearthed founder of Catastrophism,
or to guess that Sir Claude Champion and John Boulnois could be
intimate friends. Such, according to Dalroy's account,
was nevertheless the fact. The two had hunted in couples at school
and college, and, though their social destinies had been very different
(for Champion was a great landlord and almost a millionaire,
while Boulnois was a poor scholar and, until just lately,
an unknown one), they still kept in very close touch with each other. Indeed, Boulnois's cottage stood just outside the gates of Pendragon Park. But whether the two men could be friends much longer was becoming
a dark and ugly question. A year or two before, Boulnois had married
a beautiful and not unsuccessful actress, to whom he was devoted
in his own shy and ponderous style; and the proximity of the household
to Champion's had given that flighty celebrity opportunities for behaving
in a way that could not but cause painful and rather base excitement. Sir Claude had carried the arts of publicity to perfection;
and he seemed to take a crazy pleasure in being equally ostentatious
in an intrigue that could do him no sort of honour. Footmen from
Pendragon were perpetually leaving bouquets for Mrs Boulnois;
carriages and motor-cars were perpetually calling at the cottage
for Mrs Boulnois; balls and masquerades perpetually filled the grounds
in which the baronet paraded Mrs Boulnois, like the Queen of
Love and Beauty at a tournament. That very evening, marked by Mr
Kidd for the exposition of Catastrophism, had been marked by
Sir Claude Champion for an open-air rendering of Romeo and Juliet,
in which he was to play Romeo to a Juliet it was needless to name. "I don't think it can go on without a smash," said the young man
with red hair, getting up and shaking himself. "Old Boulnois may be
squared--or he may be square. But if he's square he's thick--
what you might call cubic. But I don't believe it's possible." "He is a man of grand intellectual powers," said Calhoun Kidd
in a deep voice. "Yes," answered Dalroy; "but even a man of grand intellectual powers
can't be such a blighted fool as all that. Must you be going on? I shall be following myself in a minute or two." But Calhoun Kidd, having finished a milk and soda, betook himself
smartly up the road towards the Grey Cottage, leaving his cynical informant
to his whisky and tobacco. The last of the daylight had faded;
the skies were of a dark, green-grey, like slate, studded here and there
with a star, but lighter on the left side of the sky, with the promise
of a rising moon. The Grey Cottage, which stood entrenched, as it were, in a square
of stiff, high thorn-hedges, was so close under the pines and palisades
of the Park that Kidd at first mistook it for the Park Lodge. Finding the name on the narrow wooden gate, however, and seeing
by his watch that the hour of the "Thinker's" appointment had just struck,
he went in and knocked at the front door. Inside the garden hedge,
he could see that the house, though unpretentious enough, was larger
and more luxurious than it looked at first, and was quite a different kind
of place from a porter's lodge. A dog-kennel and a beehive stood outside,
like symbols of old English country-life; the moon was rising behind
a plantation of prosperous pear trees, the dog that came out of the kennel
was reverend-looking and reluctant to bark; and the plain, elderly
man-servant who opened the door was brief but dignified. "Mr Boulnois asked me to offer his apologies, sir," he said,
"but he has been obliged to go out suddenly." "But see here, I had an appointment," said the interviewer,
with a rising voice. "Do you know where he went to?" "To Pendragon Park, sir," said the servant, rather sombrely,
and began to close the door. Kidd started a little. "Did he go with Mrs--with the rest of the party?" he asked
rather vaguely. "No, sir," said the man shortly; "he stayed behind, and then
went out alone." And he shut the door, brutally, but with an air of
duty not done. The American, that curious compound of impudence and sensitiveness,
was annoyed. He felt a strong desire to hustle them all along a bit
and teach them business habits; the hoary old dog and the grizzled,
heavy-faced old butler with his prehistoric shirt-front, and the drowsy
old moon, and above all the scatter-brained old philosopher who
couldn't keep an appointment. "If that's the way he goes on he deserves to lose his wife's
purest devotion," said Mr Calhoun Kidd. "But perhaps he's gone over
to make a row. In that case I reckon a man from the Western Sun
will be on the spot." And turning the corner by the open lodge-gates, he set off,
stumping up the long avenue of black pine-woods that pointed
in abrupt perspective towards the inner gardens of Pendragon Park. The trees were as black and orderly as plumes upon a hearse;
there were still a few stars. He was a man with more literary
than direct natural associations; the word "Ravenswood" came into
his head repeatedly. It was partly the raven colour of the pine-woods;
but partly also an indescribable atmosphere almost described
in Scott's great tragedy; the smell of something that died
in the eighteenth century; the smell of dank gardens and broken urns,
of wrongs that will never now be righted; of something that is
none the less incurably sad because it is strangely unreal. More than once, as he went up that strange, black road
of tragic artifice, he stopped, startled, thinking he heard steps
in front of him. He could see nothing in front but the twin sombre
walls of pine and the wedge of starlit sky above them. At first
he thought he must have fancied it or been mocked by a mere echo of
his own tramp. But as he went on he was more and more inclined
to conclude, with the remains of his reason, that there really were
other feet upon the road. He thought hazily of ghosts; and was surprised
how swiftly he could see the image of an appropriate and local ghost,
one with a face as white as Pierrot's, but patched with black. The apex of the triangle of dark-blue sky was growing brighter and bluer,
but he did not realize as yet that this was because he was coming
nearer to the lights of the great house and garden. He only felt
that the atmosphere was growing more intense, there was in the sadness
more violence and secrecy--more--he hesitated for the word,
and then said it with a jerk of laughter--Catastrophism. More pines, more pathway slid past him, and then he stood rooted
as by a blast of magic. It is vain to say that he felt as if he had
got into a dream; but this time he felt quite certain that he had
got into a book. For we human beings are used to inappropriate things;
we are accustomed to the clatter of the incongruous; it is a tune
to which we can go to sleep. If one appropriate thing happens,
it wakes us up like the pang of a perfect chord. Something happened
such as would have happened in such a place in a forgotten tale. Over the black pine-wood came flying and flashing in the moon
a naked sword--such a slender and sparkling rapier as may have
fought many an unjust duel in that ancient park. It fell on the pathway
far in front of him and lay there glistening like a large needle. He ran like a hare and bent to look at it. Seen at close quarters
it had rather a showy look:  the big red jewels in the hilt and guard
were a little dubious. But there were other red drops upon the blade
which were not dubious. He looked round wildly in the direction from which the dazzling missile
had come, and saw that at this point the sable facade of fir and pine
was interrupted by a smaller road at right angles; which, when he turned it,
brought him in full view of the long, lighted house, with a lake and
fountains in front of it. Nevertheless, he did not look at this,
having something more interesting to look at. Above him, at the angle of the steep green bank of the
terraced garden, was one of those small picturesque surprises
common in the old landscape gardening; a kind of small round hill or
dome of grass, like a giant mole-hill, ringed and crowned with
three concentric fences of roses, and having a sundial in the highest point
in the centre. Kidd could see the finger of the dial stand up dark
against the sky like the dorsal fin of a shark and the vain moonlight
clinging to that idle clock. But he saw something else clinging
to it also, for one wild moment--the figure of a man. Though he saw it there only for a moment, though it was outlandish
and incredible in costume, being clad from neck to heel in tight crimson,
with glints of gold, yet he knew in one flash of moonlight who it was. That white face flung up to heaven, clean-shaven and so unnaturally young,
like Byron with a Roman nose, those black curls already grizzled--
he had seen the thousand public portraits of Sir Claude Champion. The wild red figure reeled an instant against the sundial; the next
it had rolled down the steep bank and lay at the American's feet,
faintly moving one arm. A gaudy, unnatural gold ornament on the arm
suddenly reminded Kidd of Romeo and Juliet; of course the tight crimson
suit was part of the play. But there was a long red stain down
the bank from which the man had rolled--that was no part of the play. He had been run through the body. Mr Calhoun Kidd shouted and shouted again. Once more he seemed
to hear phantasmal footsteps, and started to find another figure
already near him. He knew the figure, and yet it terrified him. The dissipated youth who had called himself Dalroy had a horribly quiet
way with him; if Boulnois failed to keep appointments that had been made,
Dalroy had a sinister air of keeping appointments that hadn't. The moonlight discoloured everything, against Dalroy's red hair
his wan face looked not so much white as pale green.